WEDNESDAY, JUNE 26, 1991

Aids test scandal at KNH


FROM PAGE 1 
nate female staff members chatting. I approached them and enquired about the direction to the 
clinic undertaking Aids tests on 
students travelling abroad. I was 
some leaving for Poona University in India, I said. 
“One of the women pulled me 
aside and whispered: ‘You have 
been told about the amount of. 
money you should pay?‘. 
“I told her I’d been advised I 
could easily get one for Sh200 but I didn’t’ know where to obtain one. 
“She told me it was not Sh200 but Sh350, adding:’ ‘But you can get the other one (genuine) at an even higher fee and never go to 
India. You know, sometimes they 
can even indicate you have Aids 
because some people are jealous 
end do not want others to go out 
of the country’. 
“She told me the process involved in the genuine one 
was very long and if they detected 
even a minor disease I wouldn’t 
go to India. 
“After the lecture, I finally 
yielded and agreed to part with 
Sh3&) as she did not have loose 
change. ‘Where are the university 
forms.’ the middle-aged woman 
asked me. ¡ pretended to Iive 
forgotten to carry them feigning 
Ignorance that I didn’t think they 
were required. 
“The woman handed me a yellow piece of paper, advised me to

write my official names, wrap up 
the money with it and give it to 
them. All these took place at an isolated corner where I had been 
taken to. 
“The woman then instructed 
me to wait for her on the verandah while she processed the 
certificate. 
“After about 15 minutes, she 
emerged from a room along the 
verandah, gave me a rectangular 
piece of paper and asked me to 
examine it to see whether I was 
satisfied. It was complete with 
the hospital’s address and stamp, 
a reference number, date the title 
Medical Certificate HTLV, and 
a signature, supposedly a 
doctor’s. 
“It seemed in order and I said 
as much. The woman then told 
me not to disclose to anybody 
how 1 obtained the certificate. 
“ if anybody asks you where 
you got it, just say it is from Kenyatta National Hospital because 
if the Government knows about 
this, the man who helped me get 
it may Lose his job’, she told me. 
“She had something else to 
say. ‘You know, I knew this man 
when my brother’s son wanted to 
go abroad and he helped me get 
his certificate. I would not want 
him to lose his job. I quickly left 
the hospital and returned to the 
office. 
The letter HTLV on the certificate stand for Human T. Lymphocyte Virus, the old name for 
the Aids virus. The current name

is HIV for Human Immuno-Deficiency Virus. ‘ 
. The certificate reads: “This is 
to certify that ...has been examined and tested negative for 
HTLV. On ciLnical examination, no abnormalities detect 
ed. HTLV (Eiisa)-Negative. 
Urinalysis-Nad. Stool -normal. 
Contacted for a comment, the 
director of the hospital, Dr Nelson Agata, dismissed the certificate as a forgery and denied any 
knowledge of a scandal involving 
Aids tests. 
“What I know is that we officially charge these students going 
to India ShlOO per person for a 
full medical examination, which 
includes an AIDS test,” the director said. 
Pr Agata has a copy of the “bogus’ certificate which we gave 
him. 
On Mondy, a 23-year-old student (name withheld) told the 
Nation it took him 10 minutes to 
get his certificate. He is scheduled to leave for India on July 15. 
He told us he had arrived at 
the hospital it 2 pm and enquired 
from a security guard where the 
Aids testing office was. The 
guard took him inside a room and 
told him to wait. He returned 
with another man in a suit. 
The man told the student to 
produce the money to “catalyse 
the process” and enable him to 
get the certificate immediately 
and without much fuss. 
The student told us: “I went 
there (KNH to get an HIV test 
as required by the Ministry of 
Education, but I was shocked to 
be issued with a certificate saying 
that [am medically fit and HJV 
negative, 10 minutes later even 
before 1 was examined and tested.”

