MONDAY, JULY 26, 1999

Aids drive to target grassroots

By NATION Correspondents 
Leaders in Central Province will 
start a grassroots campaign to 
fight the spread of H1V/Aids in 
the region. 
They called for an end to the 
i culture of silence on Aids which 
they said had killed thousands 
and left about two million Kenyans infected with the virus that 
causes it. 
A leaders forum in Nyeri on 
. Saturday resolved to start the 
campaign from the sub-locations in order to empower all 
community leaders in an attempt 
to end the silence on issues of 
sex and sexuality. 
The leaders had gathered at 
the Green Hills Hotel to discuss 
the Sessional Paper No.4 on 
AIDS in Kenya. 
in what was referred to as 
“The Nyeri Declaration of 
1999”, the leaders .— led by the 
Democratic Party of Kenya
chairman, Mr Mwai Kibaki — 
said people should start recognizing the magnitude of the HI- 
V/Aids problem in the province. 
It was announced that during 
the grassroots campaign, leaders 
will be assisted by the provincial 
administrators who will be mobilizing the public. The forum 
also said NGOs will be consulted and requested to give financial support. 
The Aids problem will be part 
of the agenda of issues to be ad 
dressed during the national holidays, public meetings and barazas. 
The leaders, who included 
Members of Parliament from the 
province, observed that the rate 
at which HIV/Aids was spreading was alarming. They all 
called for collective social responsibility in dealing with the 
pandemic.

People infected with HIV and 
those who have the symptoms 
for Aids should be treated at 
home as their numbers in hospitals had doubled and was causing a serious congestion in the 
institutions. 
The community will be encouraged to take care of the patients and reduce the stigma associated with IIIV/Aids infection. 
Leaders appealed to the government to put up in place the le 
gal framework for the implementation of the Sessional Paper 
to hasten the establishment of a 
National Aids Council. The government, they said, should take 
action against some churches 
which are discouraging the use 
of condoms. 
However, Kiambu and Thika 
district MPs failed to attend the 
forum. Also, the Nyeri town
MP, Mr Wanyiri Kihoro, his 
Kieni counterpart Dr Chris Murungaru arid Mukurwe-ini legislator. Mr Muhika., did not attend. 
1JThe high incidence HIV/Aids among teenage girls in 
Western Province is being exacerbated by the belief among older infected men that having sex 
with teenagers can cure their infection. . 
An HIV/Aids symposium in 
the province yesterday heard 
that older men from age 35 and 
above were luring students and 
teenage girls into unprotected 
sex after learning that they were 
infected with either sexually 
transmitted diseases or HIV. 
The symposium was told that 
the main contributors to (tie escalating cases of child defilement in the province were being 
caused by the same kind of men. 
Men believe that if they have

unprotected sex with teenage 
girls, their sexually transmitted. 
ailments would be cured, it was 
reported. 
Dr Sobbie Mulindi of the University of Nairobi said. “22 percent of the primary and secondary school children in the province are now HIV positive. This 
is extremely alarming since 
among other important factors, 
they have been the main source 
of blood for the national blood. 
bank and their blood is no longer 
safe.’..’ 
Dr 1ulindi said the high incidence of the disease was putting 
extreme pressure on bed occupancy government hospitals 
and mortuaries across. He added 
that the bed occupancy raise in 
hospitals had risen from IS to 5 I 
percent increase within the last 
two years. 
More than 70 per cent of the
increase number of people 
wíth TB in the region were also 
HIV positive. 
The meçhc said that a World 
Health Organization study had 
recommended that Kenyatta 
National Hospital mortuary 
alone be expanded I O times loccornmodate the dead ‘cause 
of Aids-related deaths that were 
escalating in the country as a 
whole, 
He said there was need for political commitment to revise the 
population growth rate which 
was being adversely affected by 
the high death rates occasioned 
by Aids, The HIV/Aids problem, the 
university lecturer said, was no 
longer a medical problem to the 
country since its impact was 
more adverse economically, socially and politically.

