Could I be HIV-Positive? 
Q Dear June, I am 17 years old and I have 
had a problem for some time. I took an 
HIV test a while ago and the results were 
negative. Despite that fact, I still think I’m 
HIV positive. What can 1 due to eliminate the 
fear and anxiety and accept the fact that I 
am HIV negative? 
Alexander

A Alexander, thank you for your letter. You sound extremely 
worried that you are H IV-positive despite the test showing 
that you are negative. Yes, it must have been very difficult for 
you to take the test after suspecting that you may have 
contracted the KIV virus. 
Alexander, you seem preoccupied with the fact that you 
may develop the Aids symptoms. From what you’ve shared, I 
can see that It is extremely hard for you to focus your mind on 
anything when you believe that you will die soon as there is no 
cure for Aids. 
Alex, many people continue to feel they have the HIV virus 
even after they have taken the HIV test numerous times and the 
results are negative. They also continue to worry even if they 
are not exposing themselves to the virus. These people are 
called the worried well and are usually uneasy and scared 
about the possibility of having the illness. 
Let us look at three reasons that could contribute to that Not knowing how the virus is transmitted 
Belief by some people that they have whatever disease 
that happens to be attracting attention at that lame Feeling of guilt about past sexual behaviour. 
Alex, your anxiety about AIDS may make you adore 
depressed than a person who knows he is H IV-positive. That 
state of fear can actually cause signs that will appear to you 
like you are -IIV-positive. These include fatigue, sweating, 
weight loss, diarrhea, and these are also found n people who 
are very anxious and depressed. So, you can see that these 
signs can confirm your worst fears - that you are positive, when 
actually, you are not! When you are anxious and depressed, 
these feelings can make it difficult to accept the results of a
blood test. 
I would strongly suggest that you talk to your guidance 
and counselling teacher about your distress. He or she could 
also give you more information on Aids. If you have put 
yourself at risk of getting HIV in the past, and you’re feeling 
guilty about it, talking it out would help you come to terms 
with it. You could then avoid sex and prioritise on your 
studies. I would also suggest that you keep yourself busy in 
doing things that you like. Have time to socialize and get 
involved in some sports. Decide to develop a talent that you 
have. Art or poetry may put you at ease otherwise, I wish you 
peace of mind.

