{"text": "\nCan we now cure HIV in newborns?\n19 March 2013\n\nBy Dr CORY COUILLARD dn2@ke.nationmedia.com\nRecently, reports about a child born with HIV being placed on an unusually aggressive treatment regimen and thus being functionally cured of the infection grabbed headlines. \nUsing the most sensitive HIV testing available, scientists were able to find only trace amounts of HIV \u2018particles\u2019 but no virus capable of replicating.\nThe treatment consisted of giving the newborn a three-drug regimen instead of just one anti-retroviral drug. \nThe more extensive treatment was first administered when the baby girl was just 30 hours old. A month of continued treatment allowed the child\u2019s viral load to become undetectable with standard HIV testing. \nThe baby received treatment for over 15 months and due to unknown circumstances the treatment ceased when the mother stopped bringing her to the doctor. The virus should have returned without ongoing treatment under normal circumstances.\nThe next step was an attempt to replicate the results in other HIV-positive infants said Dr Deborah Persaud, a virologist at Johns Hopkins Children\u2019s Center. If the triple-drug treatment regimen can replicated it could prove life saving for millions of children.\n\u201cIf there is a trial that shows this can happen again, then this will be very important,\u201d said Dr Karin Nielsen, a pediatrician who specialises in infectious diseases at UCLA\u2019s David Geffen School of Medicine. \u201cYou\u2019ll be able to treat people very intensively and reverse the disease.\u201d\nThe news provides no answers for adults living with HIV but it could be a landmark victory in the fight against HIV. According to Dr Anthony Fauci, head of the National Institute for Allergies and Infectious Diseases, every year, 300,000 to 400,000 babies are born infected with HIV. \nMother-to-child transmission \nAccording to 2010 World Health Organisation (WHO) guidelines, HIV-positive pregnant mothers should go on a regimen of three antiretroviral drugs (ARVs) as soon as possible \u2014 and stay on these drugs until their infant is born and breastfeeding has concluded.\nAs soon as the infant is born, the baby should take a very inexpensive drug \u2014 daily for six weeks. As HIV can be transmitted through breast milk, the infant should be formula-fed rather than breastfed if possible. \nHowever, health officials do recognise that formula feeding is both expensive and difficult to do safely in resource-limited areas. Financially challenged mothers are recommended to breastfeed exclusively for six months while continuing to take ARVs.\nThe rates of transmission from mother to child are as high as 45 per cent according to The WHO. Transmission an occur during the pregnancy, labour, delivery or breastfeeding. \nThis rate can be significantly reduced to below five per cent with effective interventions. UNAIDS advocates four key strategies to achieve this goal. Improving reproductive health and HIV prevention services that will help keep women of reproductive age and their partners HIV-negative. \nHIV-positive women must be informed of HIV care, treatment and support during pregnancy, delivery and breastfeeding. \nGlobally, there are approximately 1.4 million pregnant women living with HIV and only 26 per cent, according to UNICEF, have received HIV testing. \nIn sub-Saharan Africa, only 50 per cent of pregnant women have been tested for HIV. Of the tested, only 68 per cent of HIV-positive women received ARV treatment. "}