NATION 2007

LIVING POSITIVELY

Juggling motherhood and career
HIV only adds to the equation and requires
understanding at home and at the office

You will excuse me now," I apologised
profusely to my colleagues. We were
at a farewell party for one of our
members of staff and Iwanted to go and attend
to my son, Joshua.
Before Joshua came into the picture, I
would attend any function without a second
throught. After all, Peter was virtually
his own man and could take care of himself
without mum's shadow hovering over
him. And my stepdaughters - Kadogo and
Nyambura - are used to my busy schedule
and hold the fort whenever I am out of the
country.
Thanks to Joshua, things have changed.
I am grateful for what Kadogo, Nyambura
and my partner, Richard, are doing, but I
also know I have to make time to be with
Joshua. At times it is hard juggling a career
that is as demanding as mine and motherhood,
which has its own set of demands. '
But I am also aware that the only way I
can bond with my son is by spending lots
of quality time with him and not buying
expensive stuff to replace my physical presence.
As mothers, our natural instincts are
"to have and hold" our babies and leaving
them in somebody else's care is just a temporary
measure that is brought about by
- for instance - the lanes we choose in life.
Juggling career and motherhood requires
personal tact and support from both the office
and home. There are days I leave the office
early, while at other times I report late
so that I can spend that extra moment with
Josh\,Ja. And in trying to share any extra
minute with my son, I find that at times
Joshua puts me in a tight spot.
"I don't want other people to know this,"
I confided in a friend recently. "At times
when I'm running late and Joshua has decided
that he won't eat, I am forced to put the
food on my thumb and force-feed him."
There;s this time that he splashed me
with porridge when I was feeding him. Obviously,
I got late because I had to clean up
and change my clothes. "Now I'll be caught
in that gridlock along juja Road," I complained.
But the f1ipside is that, in cleaning
up and changing, I got to spend extra time
with him.
I've talked about juggling two balls, but
when you add one more -living with HIV
- to the equation, then it requires a third
ingredient from both fronts: understanding,
There are days when I feel like not reporting
to the office or attending to anyone, however
urgent their problem might be.
Fortunately, my colleagues understand.
I have lived with HIV for almost two
decades now, but I still have "those days"
when stress grips me by the jugular. It is
normal, a friend empathised with me. Later,
when I thought deeply about it, I realised
that it is normal now that I have a baby
whom I want to live for and a virus that
wants me dead.
"I don't know how to put a picture as a
computer's screensaver," I told one of my
colleagues after asking him to hang up
Joshua's picture above a bookshelf. Now I
can just look into his smiling face whenever
I miss him and concentrate on my work.
My heart goes out to the other mothers
out there living with HIV but who have
no support systems to help mitigate their
situations. There are still institutions that
don't have HIV workplace policies and their
HIV positive employees live in fear, denial,
prejudice and silent desperation. We must
change this.
asuntawagura@hotmail.com
This is the diary of Asunta Wagura, a
mother of two who tested positive 19
years ago. She is the executive director of
the Kenya Network of Women with Aids
(KENWA).