DAILY NATION
Monday May 28, 2007
VIOLENCE ON CHILDREN

UN study indicts fathers over incest

By LUCAS BARASA
Seventy five per cent of incest in
Kenya's urban areas are by the
father, a UN study on violence
against children says.
Uncles and other relatives, the report to
be launched today atthe UNheadquarters
in Gigiri says, account for 23 per cent of
the cases. It said 83 per cent of abuse oc"
curred in the child's home.
In an interview in Nairobi, Prof Paulo
Sergio Pinheiro, who is the UN secretary
general's independent expert for the
study, said violence against children had
been increasing at an alarming rate.
The violence, he said, is aggravated by
silence, poverty, HN and Aids, bad distribution
of resources and non-access to
schools.
Hazardous work
Worldwide, the report said 150 million
girls and 73 million boys experienced
forced sexual intercourse or other forms
of sexual violence in 2002.
In 2004, 126 million children were involved
in hazardous work.
"Children' continue to fear and experience
violence in every country of the
world. Violence cuts across all social,
religious and ethnic lines," he said.
Despite banning of corporal punishment
in Kenyan schools in 2001, the
study shows that children were still suffering
from bruises, swellings, cuts, broken
bones, hearing loss, knocked out teeth,
and even death. The report said that eight
per cent ofall sexual abuse cases were perpetrated
by teachers. It added that Kenya
had between 10 to 30,000 child sex workers,
mainly in tourist areas.
'0\ study of the extent and effect of sex
tourism involving children on the Kenyan
Coast reveals 75 per cent of key informants
(underage girls involved in prostitution)
found the practice acceptable or
actively approved of it. More than 45 per
cent of those interviewed began transactional
sex for cash, goods or favours between
the ages of 12 and 13 years;' the
report said.
Access to lawyers
Eighty five per cent of children in Kenya's
police custody or correctional care, it
added, had committedno offence while in
Uganda 70 per cent of children in conflict
with the law said their main reason for
stealing was to meet basic needs.
Prof Pinheiro said children in custody
should be allowed access to lawyers and
those found engaging in prostitution han"
dled as victims instead of offenders.
He said the study was the first of its
kind by the UN and that the numbers in
it, which he said were just a tip oficeberg,
are incredible. The expert said it was sad
that violence against children was perpetrated
by those supposed to protect them
including parents, relatives, neighbours,
friends and teachers.
Calling for more awareness ofthe problem
to fight it, Prof Pinheiro called on the
media to deal with the problem in a "serious
and responsible manner."
"We must change acceptability of violence,"
he said, adding that society should
also learn to listen to children's voices.
The official said governments should
also form independent bodies where
people could "safely" give information
on violence. Parliament and the Judiciary
were further asked to protect the rights
of children.
Difficulties in evaluating violence in
families, absence of research in some
countries and solving of problems before
reaching the Judiciary, were some of the
challenges facing the fight against children
violence.
United Nations Children Fund commu,
nication officer Victor Chinyama said 12
million children in eastern and southern
Afri~ahad lost one or both parents due to
HN and Aids. "They have been taken in
by extended families where they endure
stigma and discrimination," Mr Chinyamasaid.
He called for stiffer penalties on those
involved in violence against children and
commended a recent Zambiacourt ruling
to sentence two people to 34 years in jail
for rape.
Prof Pinheiro and Mr Chinyama were
pleased that many cOWltries were making
positive moves to curb children violence.
In Kenya, a recent initiative under the
Governance, Law and. Order Sector Reform
is the construction ofholding facilities
in selected police stations to ensure
children are held separately from adults.