NATION MAY 30, 2007


Trusting the process
A positive result may seem like the end of
the world but if you take it one step at a
time, you'll soon realise that it isn't

If there's one thing I remember-clearly
about the day I tested HIV-positive
almost 20 years ago, it is the darkness
that engulfed my life, And for the endless
days that followed, the doom and
gloom mentality controlled my powers of
speech and perception.
Even now. this seems to be a sort of
natural progression that everyone who
tests HIV-positive must wade through,
I'm yet to meet someone who came out
of a voluntary counselling and testing
(VCT) centre with a positiveKesult in one
hand and an "I have a firm grip on this"
attitude in the other. I don't know for
sure, but I guess even VCT personnel are
at their wits' end when confronted with
their own positive status.
Sad and shocking
But I have realised that even with something
as sad and shocking as a positive
result, there is a gradual and systematic
process. It reminds me of the story of
creation in which God gradually separated
darkness from light and moved on
through the days until the earth had form
and life,
When we first step out of a VeT room,
our world is usually dark, And this dark
disposjtion usually tovers everything
we've ever dreamed of. At that moment,
,qllr <w~enc,!~asn~llItM>rform htir.Jife,
We wobble around like zombies. This
darkness can represent our ignorance,
fear, denial and anger at our present situation.
And that's all the more reason why
we should strive to shift it.
Blinding experience
The act of seeing the light can be a. blinding
experience, but if our lives have to
take on a particular form after a positive'result,
then we 'must have that courage
that comes from God to speak the powerful
words: "let there be light", "let there
be hope", "let there be no fear", "Iet;there
be life"...
I always tell people that positive living
is not·automatic. I didn't wake up one fine
morning and realise that I was thinking
positively. No. You have to get with the
programme, which involves keeping on
walking and talking (sometimes with cold
feet or high hopes) and even crawling
after we've fallen flat on ourfaces.
Like marriage
Just like marriage, being HIV-positive is a
relationship, albeit a parasitic one. And although
we hold the short end of the stick
in this particular relationship, it's incumbent
on us to graduate from day one all
through to day seven if we want to enjoy
some semblance of rest. One thing is for
sure; this virus will never give anyone rest
on a silver platter. It must be earned.
I admit one thing: most people who
step out of a veT centre with a positive
test result lack a helping hand to guide
them across the chasm that suddenly
opens up ahead of them.
"I walked aimlessly through the streets
of Nairobi till dusk and later walked all
the way home," a friend once told me.
She was in such a state of shock over her
HIV-positive result that she forgot she
had parked her car right outside the VCT
centre!
Three core steps
When asked about the three co're steps
one could ,~aketo make life. petter, mo·.
Jtivational speaker, lyan)a Vanzant, an-.·
swered that the third step was to "trust
the process of your life as it unfolds
moment to mom,ent, day to day, week to
week".
As you step trembling out of that VCT,
trust the process even though at that
particular moment, you don't understand
a thing, After all, this is only the first day,
As more time goes by, there will be light
'and insight.
asuntawagura@hotmail.com
This is the diary of Asunta Wagura, a
mother oftwo who tested positive 19
years ago. She is the: executive director
of the Kenya Network of Women with
Aids (KENWA).