DAILY NATION
Thursday May 31, 2007

MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
KENYA PRISONS SERVICE HIV AND AIDS POLICY LAUNCH
NAIVASHA MAXIMUM GK SECURITY PRISON

Message from the Vice President and
Minister for Home Affairs

The launch of the Kenya Prisons Service
HIV/AIDS policy is in the line with the
, Government's policy sessional paper No.
4 of 1997 which defined the institutional
framework and intensified intervention measures
for the prevention, management, control and mitigation
of the impact of HIV/AIDS.
When HIV/AIDS was declared a National Disaster
in November 1999, the Government developed the
National HJV/AIDS Strategic pIau 2000-2005 and
2005/06-2009/2010 with an aim of reducing the
spread of the pandemic. HIV/AIDS has impacted
negatively on society in many ways, for example, it
depletes and weakens the labour force, reduces productivity
and household income, increases health
costs and other costs of living. This subsequently
poses a challenge on National Development.
Under TOWA (Total War Against Aids) project, the
Government and development partners have continued
to put in place policies and infrastructure to
help implement programmes at all levels and have
issued guidelines for conducting activities in all
HIV/AIDS related areas. It is on this basis that I en-
courage more development partners to come to our
aid in the area of ARVs (Antiretrovirals) provision
to those who qualify for the same. Statistics show
that out of 350,000 people that are in need of ARVs,
only 135,000 are on the same. I take this opportune
time to thank Kijabe Aids Relief Consortium
for their initiative of starting an ARV programme at
GK Prison Naivasha.
The Government through the Governance, Justice,
Law and Order Sector (GJLOS) reform programme
and NACC (National Aids Control Council), established
2005-2009 medium term strategy (MTS) to
mainstream four cross cutting issues namely, Gender,
Children, HIV/AIDS and Environment.
I am glad that Prisons Department in its efforts to
curb the spread of HIV/AIDS has come up with a
policy to cater for its large clientele. This 1am convinced
\Vill cater for issues affecting prisoners, staff,
their families and host communities where prisons
are situated throughout the country. In addition, the
department with the help of development partners
such as Centres for Disease Control and Prevention,
AMREF Kenya, Constella Futures and UNODC have
carried out a number of activities that facilitated
the training of VCT Counselors, Behaviour Change
Communication, Educators, Health Care Providers
in HIV/TB/STI management, PMTCT (Prevention of
Mother to Child Transmission) besides establishing
VCT Centres and conducting mobile VCT outreaches
hence increasing access to VCT uptake.
May I now take this opportunity to thank all development
partners present for their immense contribution
towards the HIV/AIDS Programme in Prisons
Department and by extension to the Ministry
of Home Affairs. In spite of the challenges that the
Department is struggling with, you found opportunity
and commitment to implement the programme
with prisons. 1 also challenge more organizations
and development partners to partner with prisons
Department not only in HIV/AIDS but also in other
spheres ofinfluence.

THE MESSAGE FROM THE PERMANENT SECRETARY
The Kenya Government
through Sessional Paper
No. 4 of 1997, defined
the institutional framework
and intensified intervention
measures for the prevention, man~
agement, control and mitigation of
the impact of HIV and Aids. HIV
and Aids was declared a national
disaster on 25th November 1999.
It has mostly affected people between
15 and 49 years who form
the bulk of the workers. The Ministry
of Home Affairs has not been
spared either.
Consequently, the Kenya Government
National Aids Control Council
developed the National HIV and
Aids Strategic Plan 2005-2010 with
the aim of reducing the spread of
HN, improving the quality of life
of those infected and affected, mitigating
the socio-economic impact
of HIV and Aids and effectively
managing and co-ordinating HIV
and Aids programme activities.
To effectively fight HIV and Aids,
intervention activities have been
developed for mainstreaming in
the core functions of government
institutions. In response to the
government efforts to mitigate the
impact of HIV and Aids, the Directorate
of Personnel Management
developed a public sector workplace
policy on HIV and Aids to facilitate
the implementation of the
National Strategic Plan. It provides
a framework to guide the government
sectors and departments in
formulating sector specific workplace
policies.
It is on this basis that Kenya Prisons
Service, a department of the
Ministry of Home Affairs, has
veloped this HIV and Aids policy.
The policy contributes towards the
national goals as set in the Kenya
National HJV and Aids Strategic
Plan 2005-2010. Specifically, the
policy addresses HIV and Aids issues
affecting prisoners, prison
staff, their families and the surrounding
communities. It outlines
their rights, responsibilities, and
expected behaviour as concerns
HIV and Aids. It covers key principles
such as the recognition of
HIV and Aids as a workplace issue,
non-discrimination, screening and
confidentiality, gender responsiveness,
social dialogue, prevention,
care and support as the basis of
addressing HIV and Aids in the
Department.
The implementation of this policy
will scale up the prevention,
care and support and mitigation of
the impact among the target group
and therefore contribute towards
the national efforts to fight HIV
and Aids.

WORD FROM THE COMMISSIONER OF PRISONS
he development of this
policy has been neces.
sitated by the challenges
posed by HIV and
Aids in Kenya Prisons Service.
HIV and Aids disproportionately
affect people aged between 15 and
49 years, a group which forms
the majority of prison staff. The
illness and subsequent deaths of
prison staff is making it difficult
for the Department to achieve its
core functions. Equally affected
are the achievement of our vision
and mission of being a correctional
service of excellence in
Africa and beyond and containing
offenders in humane and safe
conditions in order to facilitate
responsive administration of justice,
rehabilitation, social re-integration,
and community protection
respectively_
The impact on the prisoners is
worse given their vulnerability
since they live within limited
freedoms. Further, of concern are
communities surrounding prison
institutions that interact with the
prison community through interdependence.
The policy aims at mitigating
THE impact of HIV and Aids on
the aforementioned groups with
the ultimate purpose of contributing
towards the national efforts in
the fight to reduce the prevalence.
It will be a handy reference to
tackle the challenges brought into
the Department by the effects of
HIV and Aids, guiding each institution
in developing programmes
to facilitate effective and planned
response to the management and
prevetion of HIV and Aids in prisons.
The policy is a re-affirmation of
the Department's commitment
to intensify its campaign against
the spread of HIV and ensure a
harmonized response in the serv~
ice. Finally, I wish to appreciate
the important role played by all
stakeholders involved in the policy
development process.