DAILY NATION
THURSDAY MAY 31, 2007

KENYA PRISONS SERVICE HIV AND AIDS POLICY LAUNCH
NAIVASHA MAXIMUM GK SECURITY PRISON

How the Department
will fight the disease

The prevention interventions
in Kenya Prisons
Service ""rin involve the
creation of HN and Aids
education, promotion of positive cultural
and behavioural change among
staff, prisoners and the surrounding
communities.
The Department will carry out a
number of activities in line with the
policy for purposes of reducing the
spread of HN and Aids and mitigating
its effects in the prison community;
Promotion of counseling, testing
and support interventions in the
workplace will be promoted.
The Department will also provide
information on safer sex practices to
staff and prisoners.
It will promote attitude and behaviour
change besides establishing HN
and Aids as well as TB and sexually
transmitted infections (STIs) resource
centres.
To empower new prison staff early,
the Department will incorporate HN
and Aids, drugs and substance abuse
education curricula in Prisons Staff
Training College.
Efforts will be made to strengthen
the capacity to promote HNand Aids
peer education and counseling interventions
at the workplace for staff
and prisoners.
Also, programmes will be put in
place to create a pool of resource persons
on HIV and Aids interventions.
Kenya Prisons Service will use a
collaborative approach in providing
comprehensive care for the infected
and the affected. It will work with
various stakeholders including Ministry
of Health, Ministry of Home
Affairs, National AlDS Control Council,
National Agency for Campaign
Against Drug Abuse and development
partners.
The Department also intends to
work with development partners and
stakeholders to establish Comprehensive
Care Centres equipped with medical
su.pplies, appropriate equipment
and trained personnel. In consultation
with the Medical Officer, efforts
will be made to provide nutritional
supplements, drugs for management
of opportunistic infections and ARVs
to prisoners and staff using National
Clinical Manual for ARV providers.

Partnering to tame HIVIAIDS
By Evans Ongwae

Even before developing its
HIV and Aids policy, the
the Kenya Prisons Service has
previously grappled with the
disease.in various ways. Through a
unique partnership with the AlC Kijabe
Hospital, the Department is providing
care to prisoners living with
HN and Aids at the Naivasha Prison.
In this prison, HN patients account
for about 2.3 per cent of a population
of more than 3,000 inmates.
Negotiations between the two institutions
commenced in October last
year. An agreement based on government
policy and the Prisons Service's
policy was reached to provide comprehensive
care and ant-retroviral drugs
(ARVs) within prison institutions, to
lessen the security burden.
In the next two months AlC Kijabe
personnel started educating prison
staff on what HN care entails. This
was after identifying people who were
interested in providing HIV care.
In January this year the first 20 patients
enrolled and thereafter more
took up ARV treatment. A seminar
to prepare the patients for treatment
was held at the end of January and
by February eight patients had been
started on ARVs.
A total of 70 patients have been enrolled
in this programme with 36 of
them on ARVs and the rest on general
care.
There have been good developments
with 98 per cent of patients enrolled
in care showing improvement in the
form of increased weight gain or being
less prone to attacks by opportunistic
infections.
Treatment of opportuulstic infections
and other diseases is done by the
hospital medical staff in collaboration
with the prison personnel using antibiotics.
Laboratory services are also offered
to the patients. Hospital staff draw
blood samples and take them to Kijabe
for CD4 cmIDt, liver function test,
kidney function test and others.
Working hand in hand, the prison
and the hospital staff have renovated
the pharmacy. at the Naivasha Prison
to create one consultation and postpharmacy
room to facilitate dispensing
ofARVs.
AlC Kijabe Hospital has also trained
nine officers who help patients to adhere
to ARV treatment.
The partnership between the Kenya
Prison Service and the AlC Kijabe
Hospital has demonstrated that provision
of health care to inmates is possible.

IMPORTANCE OF THE POLICY
The Kenya Prisons Service Policy on
HN and Aids provides the guiding
principles and framework for scaling
up responses in the Department. It
forms the basis for the implementation of inter~
ventions relevant to the prisons community. The
policy addresses HN and Aids issues affecting
prisoners, prison staff, their families and communities
surrounding prison institutions.
The Department like other sectors has borne
the brunt ofHNand Aids since the most affected
group faUs vv1thin the economically productive,
mobile and sexually active ages of 15~49 years.
The services have suffered due to the impact of
HN and Aids which is manifested in reduced
workforce due to deaths, prolonged illness, absenteeism
and low morale of affected workers
and interruptions in their work schedules due to
social commitments such as seeking medication.
The loss of human resource due to deaths leads
to the government incurring increasing costs in
recruiting and training more officers to replace
those who die. The economic burden is even
worsened by the increased expenses in care and
support for infected prisoners.
The policy aims to address the impact caused
by HN and Aids within prison institutions. It
provides guidance for those who deal with the
day-to-dayHN and Aids related issues and problems
that arise within the prison setting and
outlines the rights of prisoners and prison staff,
their responsibilities and expected behaviour in
the prisons. It covers key areas such as legal and
regulatory framework, gniding principles, human
resources management of both HN infected and
affected prisons staff and prisoners and HN and
Aids programmes in the prisons.

Rationale
hiv and Aids present a great challenge
to the Kenya Prisons Service
which is losing manpower due to AlDS
related deaths. The security of prisons
is equally compromised due to absenteeism
and physical weakness of officers
suffering from opportunistic infections.
There is also reduced performance due
to ;stress and stigma associated vvith an
HN positive status. The Department's
economic burden is increased by the
costs incurred in treating and caring
for infected and affected prisoners.
Kenya Prisons Service, pursuant to the
Public Sector Workplace Policy on HIV.
and Aids, 2005 has developed a sector specific
policy which addresses the unique environment
which curtailed liberties under which prisoners
live and the poor working conditions under which
prisons staff work. The policy demonstrates the
Department's commitment in taking fonvard
steps in the management of HN and Aids and
forms a framework for an effective response.
Objectives
TIle main objective of this policy is to provide
a framework to effectively address EN and Aids
within the Kenya Prisons Service.
Specifically, the Policy aims to:
Set minimum internal requirements (MIR)
for managing HIV and Aids in the Prisons
Department;
Establish structures and promote programmes
to ensure non-discrimination and
non-stigmatisation of the infected and the affected;
Prevent new infections among prisoners,
prison staff and members of the surrounding
communities;
Improve the quality qf life of prisoners, prison
staff and members of the surrounding
communities infected and affected by HN
and Aids.
Mitigate the social and economic impact of
HNandAids;
Ensure expanded resource mobilization efforts
to supplement government allocation to
HN and Aids interventions;
Guide prison staff and prisoners on their
rights and obligations regarding HN and
. Aids; and
Create and environment conducive to research,
capacity building, monitoring and
evaluation.