DAILY NATION
Thursday June 7, 2007

MARIE STOPES KENYA
PROTECTION FROM UNPLEASANT OUTCOMES

Stories by EVANS ONGWAE
arie Stopes Kenya,
established in 1985, is a
leader in the reproductive
health sector in the
country. Marie Stopes Kenya is a non·
governmental, not-for-:profit organization
affiliated to Marie Stopes International of
London in the United Kingdom which has
a presence in 42 countries in Asia, Latin
America, Africa, Europe and South Asia.
The Kenyan affiliate was the first
project in Africa and is a role model for
others on the continent.
Upon establishment, the NGO
proceeded to open the first clinic at
Pangani in 1986. From this hnmble
beginning, Marie Stopes Kenya, now
operates 22 reproductive health facilities
nationwide.
These consist of 18 clinics and four
maternity nursing homes.
It aims at achieving 650,000 couple·
years of protection (GYPs) by 2010. CYP is
an indicator to measure family planning
programme effectiveness.

Scope of Service and Activities
Marie Stopes Kenya offers the follO'wing
high quality and affordable services in its
facilities:
• Medical Consultation.
e Specialist gynecological consultations.
e Comprehensive family planning
services.
e OUtreach voluntary surgical
contraception.
e Pre-natal and post-natal care.
e Child welfare clinic.
• Comprehensive laboratory services.
• 24·hour maternity services.
• Free condom distribution.
• School health education.
• PMTCT.
• vcr.
e Youth reproductive health services.
The condom or contraceptives social
marketing project is one of the most high
profile activities of Marie Stopes Kenya.
'We pelieve that Marie Stopes is making
a major contribution in helping people
to protect themselves from unwanted
pregnancies, sexually transmitted ~
infections and HN/AiDS by providing the
Raha condom," says Mr. Cyprian Awiti,
the organization's Programmes Director.
Raha means pleasure in English, 'We
don't want to associate sex with HNjAiDS
and sickness," says Mr. Awiti. "Sex is part
of life and people should be protected
from unpleasant outcomes. We want to
protect people as they go on with their
lives."
In national reach, Marie Stopes is
second to the government network,
according to the NGO's boss. 'We have
more than 50 outreach clinics, 22 static
clinics, we have distributors of our
condoms - about 1,00Q and the social
franchising people who number 141," says
Mr. Awiti.
"So, when you look at the impact of
Marie Stopes in condom distribution in
Kenya, we do 75 per cent of the market
share in the country. In fact, if you look
at family planning as a whole, we could
be contributing about 40 per cent. But
for one particular contraception method
called tubal ligation, Marie Stopes is
doing 75 per cent of the total market
share in this country."
Marie Stopes is a major contributor
to health care in the country and
especially in regard to provision of sexual
and reproductive health products and
services.
Says Mr. Awiti: ''We work very closely
with the provincial health management
teams, Ministry of Health's Division of
Reproductive Health, all stakeholders
including the National Co·ordinating
Agency for Population and Development
and all other agencies that provide
reproductive health services in the
country. We collaborate and network:'
He says the NGOs future plans include
doing male circumcision to help protect
men from HNjAIDS infection.
A study done in Kenya shows that,
chances of people who are circumcised
not contacting HIVjAIDS is about 60 per
cent.
In future, Marie Stopes Kenya intends
to eXpand geographically to other areas
like Embu, Machakos, Siaya, Bondo,
Migori~Bungoma, Busia and Kilifi.
In its strategic plan, the organization
indicates that it intends to have 30 clinics
in two tothree years up from the current
22.
"We plan to expand everywhere
including North Eastern Province where
we don't have a presence so far," says Mr.
Awiti.
''We also want to expand our mix of
family planning methods and services. We
are offering curative services but that is
not our core business. Our core business
is providing sexual and reproductive
health services," he adds.
Marie Stopes Kenya is transparent,
accountable and results·oriented
organization that is going places, he
asserts. 'We operate above board:'


JOIN EFFORTS TO INCREASE ENLIGHTENMENT IN LONG TERM SAFEGUARDS

Marie·Stopes Kenya works with private medical
practitioners to increase the upta:ke of family planning
methods and especially intra·uterine contraception
devices (IUCDs and voluntary surgical sterilisation.
This is besides working closely with the Ministry of
Health.
The objective is to increase the availability of these
long term family planning methods.
The initiative has been operating in Western Kenya
where the team has been working with and managing
a network offranchised private practioners.
This partnership has helped to debunk some
myths about these contraceptiye methods by making
information on them available to people who need
family planning services.
A study carried on family planning revealed that
the uptake of IUCDs and vasectomy waS negatively
affected by myths. That is why Marie Stopes decided to
work with health professionals to increase awareness
ofthese family planning methods and thereby
increasing the uptake.
Through respective professional aSsociations, Marie
Stopes approached 141 health practitioners with 0'WIl
clinics and keen.onreproductive health issues. It
discussed with doctors, nurses and clinical officers to
offer reproductive health services over and above their
core focus.
The nonNgovernmental organization (NGO) then
trained and gave equipment to them so that they
were better equipped to serve people who visited
their clinics. The training covered issues such as
contraception and updates on sexually transmitted
infections (STIs).
These clinics are painted green and have the sign
:Arona' a Swahili word for 'decide;
Marie Stopes, contends Marie Stopes Programme
Director Cyprian Awiti, has the largest social
franchising project in Kenya. "The quality of service is
very good and the clients are' very happy. We believe
there are a number of Kenyans deniedthe opportunitY
or do not have access to reproductive health services;'
With its 22 service delivery clinics, outreach or
mobile clinics and the private practitioner facilities,
the NGO has expanded the points from which Kenyans
can <tccess reproductiv: health services.
''Marie Stopes believes women should be productive,
not reproductive," says M:t.Awiti, warning that getting
children too early, too often or too late comes with
risks fOrwomen. "We are not stopping people from
having children; we are helping them to plan families.
Women should not be made reproductive machines
but empowered through family planning."
Men, women and youth of reproductive age need
integrated and innovative health services so that they
get "children by choice, not by chance" as Marie Stopes
International says of its goal.
Family planning has a number of issues at different
levels. At the family level, it is a problem having too
many children that one cannot even take care of.
At the national level, it brings too many problems
- education,' employment; health':'" the government
"budget cannot be able to sustain a high PQIJUlation
growth rate.
He says family planning contributes to better
lives and has a bearing on education, health and
employment in a nation.
"The·government through the Ministry of Health
has now coine up with the'National Health Strategic
Plan II which all of us working in this sector aspire
to. We are not working independently. The domain
of provision of health services is for the Government
i of Kenya. We are complementing government efforts.
So, we must work within the realm of the government
policies and legal framework"
The national strategic plan is being implemented
through annual operational plans I·V. This has
brought on board the public sector, NGOs and faith·
based organizations.
He gives credit to the government for working hard
to provide health services to wananchi.
The government, says :Mr. Awiti, has perlormed
well in health. Its performance so far is encouraging.
''Today if you go to hospitals you will find medicines
and working health facilities - which was not the
case before," he say~ aJ;ld is happy to notethat
the government recognizes the contribution of
organizations such as Marie Stopes to improving
people's health.