DAILY NATION
Thursday June 14, 2007

Kenya in new blood transfusion procedure

Dogged by blood shortages
since the advent of HIV and
Hepatitis B, Kenya plans a
novel way to reduce wastage,
writes ISAIAH ESIPISU

enya will soon move from transfusing
whole blood to transferring only the
specific component required by a pa:
ient, for example an anaemic person
will only get red blood cells while a cancer case
will be given plasma alone.
In a project that plans to cut blood wastage,
it will also introduce smaller packs for children
because at the moment the product is stored in
uniform containers despite children requiring
less blood - the remainder is usually thrown
away. The Blood Safety Project will enhance the
country's capacity to derive the various blood
components from the whole blood and store
them as separate products. The National Blood
Transfusion Centre, says its director Dr Jack Nyamongo,
has the capacity to separate these blood
products but the Project is working on further
enhancing this capability to make blood products
more readily available.
The Blood Safety (MOTTAINAI) Project is
an initiative of the, Ministry of Health through
the National Blood Transfusion Service in collaboration
with the Japan International Cooperation
Agency. Mottainai is a Japanese word that
embraces the spirit of not wasting resources. It
was introduced internationally by Nobel Laureate
ProfWangari Maathai. The three~year project
was incepted last year. It covers the National
Blood Transfusion Service in Nairobi, the Regional
Blood Transfusion Centre in Nakuru and three
model hospitals: Nakuru Provincial General Hospital;
Koibatek District Hospital and Naivasha
District Hospital.
According to Mr Nick Tanui, the regional
technical director and acting centre director of
the Nakuru Regional Blood Transfusion Centre,
some of the major problems facing hospital blood
banks when it comes to blood handling are lack of
basic infrastructure like refrigeration, Irregular
electricity supply, inadequate laboratory equipment
and lack of proper logistics and inventory
management. To ease infrastructure problems,
JICA, through this project will provide various
equipment.
Training and sensitization on proper logistics
and inventory management of blood is another
key component of the project. Ms Miyuki Tamura,
the project coordinator, emphasizes proper
record keeping and inventory management as key
in curbing blood wastage and also in ensuring
availabiliry of safe blood.
For instance, applying the concept of First to
Expire, First Out CFEFO) Ca distribution management
system whereby blood with the earliest
expiration date is distributed first and blood with
later expiry dates are only distributed after the
earlier-dated supplies have been issued) reduces
the amount of blood wasted due to expiry. The
project also seeks to improve management of the
blood cold chain from the point of donation to the
point of transfusion.
To avoid wastage of blood in paediatric
transfusion cases, the project plans to introduce
the preparation of smaller packs for children
albeit on pilot basis. The necessary equipment
for preparation of these packs will be installed
and training on preparation of the packs will be
carried out.
Through the Blood Safety Project four staff
from the National and Nakuru Regional Blood
Transfusion Centre have been trained in Japan
Project to introduce smaller
packs for children to reduce
wastage ofblood products
on blood safety. More training will be conducted
in the course of the project implementation. It
is expected that the knowledge and skills gained
will be transferred to all those involved in the
blood transfusion chain.
The average adult has about five liters of blood
living inside of their body, coursing through their
vessels, delivering essential elements, and removing
harmful wastes. Without blood, the human
body would stop working.
Blood is the fluid of life, transporting oxygen
from the lungs to body tissue and carbon dioxide
from body tissue to the lungs. Blood is the fluid
of growth, transporting nourishment from digestion
and hormones from glands throughout the
body. Blood is the fluid of health, transporting
disease fighting substances to the tissue and
waste to the kidneys.
Because it contains living cells, blood is alive.
Red blood cells and white blood cells are responsible
for nourishing and cleansing the body. Since
the cells are alive, they too need nourishment.
Vitamins and .Minerais keep the blood healthy.
The blood cells have a definite life cycle, just as
aU living organisms do.
Approximately 55 per cent of blood is plasma,
a straw-colored clear liquid. The liquid plasma
carries the solid cells and the platelets which help
blood clot. Without blood platelets, you would
bleed to death.
Whenthe human body loses a little bit ofblood
through a minor wound, the platelets cause the
blood to clot so that the bleeding stops. Because
new blood is always being made inside of your
bones, the body can replace the lost blood. When
the human body loses a lot ofblood through a major
wound, that blood has to be replaced through
a blood transfusion from other people.
But everybody's blood is not the same. There
are four different blood types. Plus, the blood
has Rh factors which make it even more unique.
Blood received through a transfusion must match
your own. Patients who are scheduled to have
major surgery make autologous blood donations
Cdonations of their own blood) so that they have
a perfect match.
Interesting blood cells and some of the special
proteins blood contains can be replaced or sup~
plemented by giving a person blood from someone
else. This process is called a transfusion. In
addition to receiving whole blood transfusions,
people can also receive transfusions of a particular
component of blood that they need. For
example, someone can receive only platelets, red
blood cells, or a clotting factor. When people donate
blood, the whole blood can be separated into
its different parts