DAILY NATION
Wednesday June 27, 2007

LIVING POSITIVELY

MY SECRET TO LIVING WITH HIV

Keep doing the little things you
are told by your doctor and the
going will be less stressful
there is one question l have been asked more times than! calle
to count, it is "What's your secret to Jiving this long with H!V?"
"!f! had a secret, !ike a lot of people seem to think! do, i wou~d
be one of the richest women in the world," 1told one of my friends.
And that's because most people will pay anything to ~essen the pain
and challenges of an issue like H~V.
Each week l receive mail from people who are either infected or
affected, and the one issue tllat preoccupies them is facing up to
the everyday challenges of living with the virus, .~ guess most people
out there see my longevity - if i can cali it that - as a sign that i
have some positive living aces up my steeve.
As American talk~show hostess Oprah Winfrey once said: "Tile
big secret to !ife is that there is no big secret. Whatever your goa!,
you can get there, as long as you are wiiHng to be honest with yourself
about the preparation and work involved. There are no back
doors, no free rldes. There's just you, this moment, and a cholce,"
And Oprah's statement apdy descdbes my situat~on. For the re~
cord, I don't have a secret formula for positlve living.
"Keep doing the Ijtt~e things that I've told you and the going win
be iess stressful," my doctor once to~d me.
ff these ~ittle things are I.Nhat folks think are my big secret, then
it's an open one because it's the !~st of dDS and don'ts that doctors
normally give their H1V-positive clients. The list consists of things
Hke nutrition, exerdse, acceptance, a faithful He and l100ktng up
with a support group, Over the years i've tried to live as per my
doctor's prescriptions, a~though ~~ke every Jane out there, ! haven't
adhered to this 100 per cent.
i think that as Oprah reaHsed, there are no quick fixes to anything
under the sun. ~n her article, she readHy vO!U!1teers that if there
was a secret to fix for her well~documentedweight issues, for
example, she would have it because she's tried almost everything
under the sun.
~'ve walked that road too, Immediately after i tested positive,
I ran round in cirdes in search for something - anything - that
would zap this ugly virus out of my life. If I wasn't on the front line
in a healing crusade, I was waiting in a queue on a creaky wooden
bench in a quack's shack, Like most people driven by fear, ignorance
and desperation, ! was convinced that there was a quiCk fix
somewhere that would make me. HIV-!ess again. Boy was i wrong?
Of course, you know where dead ends always lead -I ended up
broke and nearly dead.
Ithink that, by permanently fixing our gaze on the flnal solution
and ignoring the small steps thatwe need to take everyday,
we end up missing the whole essence of positive living. Most of us
rationalise that - if we know beforehand how to handle the issues
ahead of us - then the roughs and tumbies ahead of us will be
mere details. But that's not the reality on the ground.
The reality is that we have to live for the moment. Much as we
need to learn from each other, we must endeavour to make our
own personal choices because a goal like positive living isn't a onestop
destination but a daily journey.

This is the diary of Asunta Wagura, a mother of two who tested
positive 19years ago. She ;s the executive director of the Kenya
Network of Women with Aids (KENWA).

