SATURDAY NATION
July 7,2007

PANDEMIC
ELIZABETH MATAKA AND ZEDA ROSENBERG

Empowering women key
step in fight against Aids

More than 1,000 leaders from 
around the world came together
in Nairobi this week
discuss issues related to
HIV and Aids. While conferences on the
pandemic are rather commonplace, this
meeting was different.
This time, African women - doctors,
activists, nurses, grandmothers, community
leaders, andwomenliving with HIV
- took centre stage at the International
Women's Health Summit.
It makes good sense that women are
leading the fight against Aids. Some 60
per cent of Africans living 'With HIV are
women. Among young people the situation
is worse: More than 75 per cent of
15-24-year-o!ds living with HIV in Africa
are women.
In Kenya, youngwomen are five times
as likely as young men to be HlVpositive.
IN ZAMBIA, AiDS HAS REDUCED a
woman's average life expectancy to 37
years. Across the continent, women are
struggling to educate orphans, care for
the sick, and feed their families underthe
weight of this epidemic.
Encouraging people to always use condoms
and be faithful to one partner is
important, but it is not enongh. In fact,
we know that in some cases marriage,
or what a woman believes is a monogamous
relationship, can actually increase
a woman's risk ofHN
A woman may not be able to convince
her partner to use condoms - or she and
her partner may want to have children,
which they cannot do while abstaining or
using condoms. And remaining faithful
to her husband cannot protect a woman
whose husband is not faithful to her.
To successfully defeat Aids we must
do more to help women to protect themselves.
A vaccine to prevent HIV, once developed,
could save millions oflives. Another
promising tool is a microbicide, a vaginal
gel, ring or tablet that women could
use to prevent infection.
Advocates in Africa
Microbicides are not yet available, but
researchers and advocates in Africa and
around the world are working to develop
them and carry out clinical trials to test if
they are safe and effective in preventing
HIVinfection.
By putting protection from HIV into
the hands of women, a microbicide
would slow the spread of the virus and
finally allowwomen to take control over
their own health.
We must prioritise research on these
promising preventive technologies. At
the same time, we must do more with
the tools that already exist.
The female condom should be affordable
and accessible to women in Africa.
We must expand prevention of mother-
to-chiId-transmission services so that
every pregnant woman receives the care
and treatment she needs.
LIKE NEARLYALL OF US, THE women
attending this week's summit have lost
family members, workmates, andfriends
to this disease.
These women are on the frontlines
every day - the doctor working long
hours in the clinic, the grandmotherwho
cares for her orphaned grandchildren,
the community care worker visiting the
homes ofthe sick, thewomanlivingwith
HIVwho had the courage to say so publicly,
the sexworker who spends her days
educating her peers at the taxi rank.
These women are the ones who have
told us ofthe desperate need for femaleinitiated
HIV prevention approaches.
After all, their lives and the future of our
families and countries depend on it.

Elizabeth Mataka is the United Nations Secretary
General's Special Envoy lor Aids in
Alrica. Dr Zeda Rosenberg is Chiel Executive
Officer olthe International Partnership
for Microbicide.