DAILY NATION
Thursday July 12, 2007

Court upholds death sentence on medics

Bulgaria waits for a
meeting ofthe High
Judicial Council and
expects a pay deal

TRIPOLI, Wednesday
ibya's Supreme Court upheld today
death sentences on six foreign
medics for infecting Libyan children
with HIV, but the judgment
could clear the way forthe government
to free them.
Experts said the ruling completed the
role of the judiciary in the highly-politicised
trial ofthe five Bulgarian nurses and
a Palestinian doctor, and Libya's executive
can now seek their release subject to a
deal with families ofthe children.
The case is expected to go to a government-
controlled High Judicial Council
which will have the power to commute
the sentence or even pardon them.
"The court rejects the appeals of the defendants
and confinns the death penalty,"
judge Fathi Dhan told a five-minute hearing.
The six medics were not in court to
hear the ruling.
European Union leaders expressed regret
at the court ruling but said theywere
still confident·a solution could be found.
"I firmly. hope that clemency will be
granted to the medical staff:' EU External
Relations Commissioner Benita FerreroWaldner
said.
The case has blocked Muammar Gaddaft's
efforts to deepen links to the West
after shaking off decades of isolation in
c. ")03when Libya scrappedits programme
:prohibited weapons.
The six medics were sentenced to death
in December after being convicted of
infecting 426 Libyan children with the
deadly virus while they worked at the
children's hospital in the city of Benghazi
in the 1990s.
In jail since 1999, they say they are innocent
and were tortured to make them
confess. Some Western scientists say negligence
and poor hospital hygiene were
the .real culprits and that the six were
made into scapegoats.
Hopeswere raised for a deal to win their
release on Thesday evening when Libya's
Gaddafi Foundation charity said it had
reached an accord with the children's
families that ''puts an end to the crisis':
Libyan officials say the Council would
A Bulgarian
nurse accused of
infecting Libyan
children with HIV
stands behind
bars in a court in
Tripoli in this file·
picture. Photo/
REUTERS
only agree to the release ofthe nurses if a
settlement were reached in private talks
between the families and the EUon fundiIig
for the children's medical care.
Behind the scenes talks have been taking
place between the EUand the association
ofthe families ofthe children on just
such a possible deal - to provide a fund of
tens of millions of dollars for the families
to pay for the children's future care.
Libya calls the cash "compensation" - a
term Bulgaria rejects as it says it implies
the medics are guilty.
The Libyan families have asked for 10
million euros (Sh891 million) for each
child, far in excess of what observers say
the EU has been prepared to pay. The
Gaddaft Foundation charity, run by a son
of Libyan leader Muammar Gaddaft, Sait
ai-Islam, has been a central player in facilitating
the talks.
In Sofia, Bulgarian President Georgi
Parvanov urged Libya today to find a
quick solution to free the five Bulgarian
nurses and a Palestinian doctor.
He said: "Unfortunately, the court's ruling
today is not a surprise. We expected
the death sentences to be confirmed:'
President Parvanov told reporters. "We
expect and insist for a swift solution by
The year the foreign medics were
arrested in the HIV case
Libya's High Judicial Council to finally
complete the case': The case is expected
to go to a government-controlled High Judicial
Council which will have the power
to commute the sentence or even pardon
the medics.
"We will continue with our efforts
along with European and other partners
to reach a final agreement and a decision
bythe HighJudicial Council, whichwillbe
positive for the nurses;' Parvanov said.
Bulgarian Prime Minister Sergei Stanishev
said Libya's High Judicial Council
will meet on Monday, which he said was
a positive sign.
''We hope things will be clear on Monday.
The decision of the council will open
the way for solving the case on a political
level and will be the final step in the talks
held in the last few months:'MrStanishev
told national radio. The court's ruling
completed the role of the judiciary in the
highly politicised trial of the six medics,
experts say, openingthewayfor Libya's executive
to seek their release: (Reuters)