SUNDAY NATION
July 8, 2007

Teaching the youth how to make
movies on the Aids pandemic

BY CATHERINE NDIOO
ho hates a spectacle of
young people struggling to
learn a newtechnique? Well
last week was such an opportunity,
as 30 young people
from across the world
converged on Nairobi in a competition that involved
making HIV-themed short films.
Inexperienced in film-making but passionate
to bring down the HIVjAids scourge, theyail attended
the International Women's Summitlast
week, each keen on making the winning film.
Dubbed 48fest, the film competition is part
of M1V International's HIV and Aids prevention
campaign - "StayingAlive:' in partnership
with the African music channelM1Vbase, and
gives youth participants an opportunity to produce
female-theme driven short films on HIV
and AIDS.
48 hours
This year, they were given just 48 hours to
write, shoot, edit and deliver a short film running
for three minutes on a specific HIV and
Aids issue.
'We try to be as creative as we can, in order
to getto young people. And at the same timewe
use the audience to generate the content so as
to appeal to many people;' said Georgia Arnold,
Vice-President, Public Mairs, M1V Networks
International.
"The contestants were aged between 19 and
23 years and are very opinionated;' she added.
They were picked by an MTV production
team based in London, and it took a month to
research on them and get the contestants list
ready. The main qualification was that they
have an interest in the work they were doing,
she said.
Duriug the competition last week, the 30 contestants
were subdivided into six teams of five,
all from different countries (in orderto capture
the different backgrounds, cultures and views)
and given a theme to develop the film from.
''Most of them do not speak English as their
first language but they were required to get
along and to make the movie. We were not
looking at the most technically correct film but
one that passes the HIV/Aids message across in
an effective manner. It should also be touching
on women;' said Ms Arnold.
"While they have different cultural views
and approaches to communicate liN messages
taken from their home countries, they come
to an agreement on the bestway to go about it,
and put it on their film;' she said as she oversaw
the 30 contestants kick offthe competition
last week.
1Welve countries were represented and every
team was given alocal film expertto act as mentors
and gnide them on the techniques of film
making. Each team was also given atitle, focusing
on one of the five female-driven HIV and
Aids-themed issues including the feminisation
of the disease, access to VeT, female condoms,
HNand pregnancy, and stigma and poverty
'1 learnt ofthe competition through the internet
and 1applied;' Wariri Muhungi, 23, said.
A contestant, a women's rights activist and a
volunteer toYWCAin Geneva, Wariri w~ quite
excited to be part ofthe project. She is a Kenyan
living in Geneva.
"Evenif! do not win, the opportunitywill enable
us to enlighten others as we educate ourselves;'
she said as she went on with the shoots
with her team clad in blue T-shirts for identification
purposes.
Sha.ring id.ea.s
''We are also working with other youths of diverse
cultures and thatis a great opportunity to
interact and share ideas. It is also an opportunity
for young people to be positive;' said Wariri.
The charnringyounglady, whohadjnst concluded
her internship with UNICEF, was also
excited that these messages will reach as many
people across the world as possible through the
M1Vchannel.
MTV base is a 24-hour English language
mnsic television channel reaching 48.5 million
African viewers in 10.5 million households in
48 countries in sub-Saharan Africa. The combi-
nation of the M1VNetworks' brands is seen in
504.4 million honseholds in 162 countries iu 28
languages. MsWariri's ideas for her team was to
focus on early childhood education so as to raise
literacy levels for women, and solving motherto-
child transition ofthe disease.
Anothercoutestant, TamayaAbbadi, 24, from
Jordan was keen on dealing with discrimination
and stigmatisation issues, as she submitted
her contribution to her team.
"I believe -that media is a significant tool to
reach manyyoungpeople and pass on messages
you cannot talk about opeuly to an audience of
different cultures. It also reaches a bigger audience;'
she said.
Success stories
She was also using the opportunityto meet and
share experiences, success stories and lessons
learnt from different countries.
"Three months ago, different organisations
in Jordan came out with audio messages as the
most appropriate in dealing with HIV: This experience
makes me better placed;' she said. "I
have come out 'With something that I can apply
to spread the HNmessage in my country;' she
said. Tamayais an HIVtrainer with an outreach
programme in Jordan.
Another Kepyan, Michael Mutahi, said a
ftiend asked him to apply for the contest, and
was happy that he had gained skills to pass on
HNmessages. His preferred theme was stigma
and poverty.
"Poverty is the main problem and is the reason
we are not able to eliminate the disease as
fast aswe should. Manyinfections currently are
as a result of poverty - especially in the slums