DAILY NATION
RESEARCH

Thursday July 19, 2007

New microbicides hold big promise

As the world waits for a HIV
vaccine, research efforts
promise a microbicide much
earlier, writes ARTHUR
OKWEMBA

New generations of microbicides that are
. formulat.ed using antiretroviral drugs have
renewed hopes of getting a tool that would
prevent HIV infectiQn before 2015. Since
ARVs have been shown to prolong the lives of people
infected 'With HIV; scientists· are positive that these
could be turned into effective microbicides.
"We are very optimistic about the second generation
of microbicides because unlike the first genera.:.
tion, we know of the biological responses between the
virus and the drugs," says Dr Zeda Rosenberg, the
chief executive officer of the International Partner~
ship for Microbicides (IPM). Dr Rosenberg describes
the anti~HIVmicrobicide formulations based on ARVs
as highly potent and HIV speciftc. They also come in
small molecules, which help scientists develop different
combinations.
"Microbicides specifically designed to be active.
against HIV as well as combination therapies hold the
promise of even greater protection against HIV transmission
than earlier formulations," says IPM.
Pharmaceutical industries have given IPM free
licenses to develop, manufacture and distribute
antiretroviral components as microbicides. They
include GlaxoSmithKline, Gilead Sciences, Inc., and
Johnson and Johnson pharmaceutical companies.
ARVs under utilization include a wide range of formulations
currently being taken by people living
with HIVjAids. Microbicides are self-administered
topical substances that can blocktransmission of HIV
or other sexually transmitted infections. They can
be produced in various forms. such as gels, creams,
sponges, lubricants, and intravaginal rings that are
applied inside the vagina or rectum.
Those formulated using ARVs target HIV or the
cells it infects. Some of these drugs stop HlV from
binding on a persons CD4 receptor of target ceil, a
critical processes that enables. the virus to replicate.
Currently, a microbicide gel formulated using tenofo~
vir - one of the keyARVs used in HIV/Aids treatment
- is in stage 2b of the trials in South Africa. This trial
is being done on small number of volunteers to test
its efficacy, before a bigger trial is done in the next
couple of months.
Women participating in this study are applying
the microbicide t'Wice: 12 hours before sex and 12
hours after sex. In Africa, studies on ARV formp.lated
microbicides are also taking place in Rwanda and
Tanzania.
The focus now is also on the dosages and the form
in which these microbicides will be· delivered. Will it
be once or t'Wice a day, or come in the form of gels,
intra~vaginal rings, or vaginal tablets. And can any
of these forms be applied by a woman during or after
sexual intercourse.
In fact, a lot of product acceptability studies are
going across sub-Saharan African countries, where
over 75 per cent of microbicide studies are being
conducted. Efforts to ensure the tools are acceptable
to women, and do not irritate or offend their male
partners are underway.
Microbicides is one in the cocktail of tools including
female condoms which are seen as the best way
of empowering women to protect themselves against
HIV. "Women lack specific methods to protect themselves
from HIV infection, especially when engaging
in unprotected sex," says Dr Florence Mirembe of
Makerere University, Uganda.
"There is· need to come up with a protection gear
that empowers them, since utilization of the female
condom remains low."
The challenge facing most microbicides developers
is how to make those that will turn out to be effective
accessible and affordable to the women who need
them most.
"Community members provide valuable insight
into the cultural contexts where the trials are going
to take place, and need to be consulted prior to commencing
the research," says Pauline Irungu of Global
Campaign for Mlcrobicides.
- An Awe Feature~



FOOD NOW A PRESCRIPTION IN HIV AIDS
Food now a prescription in
Aids treatment programme

evidence-based study on
HIV/Aids treatment has demonstrated
that nutrition is an
.mportant part of the medical
package, and that it must be included in
managing the disease. As a result, two
government institutions in Eldoret are
now prescribing antiretroviral drugs
alongside food as the full medical dose.
The institutions donate the food to the
index patient and family members for
the first six months, before engaging
them in money generating activities for
self-support.
The initiative that began as an observation
with one patient in 2001 has
over 50,000 HIV infected people and
their dependants in western and North
Rift parts of the country.
The Moi University School of Medicine,
Moi Teaching and Referral Hospital
and the Indiana University of the
US have partnered in a program called
Academic Model for the Prevention and
Treatment of HlV/Aids (AMPATH),
which grows half of the required foodstuff
while the rest is supplemented
by donors including the World Food
. Program (WFP).
The antiretrovirals are provided
through the US President's Emergency
Plan for Aids Relief. "We harvest over
six metric tons of high valuehorticultural
products weekly, which is half
of the total food needed for the same
period, and distribute them to some
of our food insecure patients and their
families all over our area· of jurisdiction,"
says Hanna Tadayo of AMPATH,
WFP donates the remaining 50 per
cent of the total food needed for about,
30,000 patients and their families. This
comes in form of maize, legumes, corn
soy blend, and cooking fat to supplement
AMPATH's green vegetables and
fresh fruits. 'IWe realised that it was not
practicable to feed the index patients
while the rest of the family members
starved," says Dr Silvester Kimaiyo
the programme manager. This has
forced the programme to include all
the dependants in its budget, where the
ratio is approximately one patient to six
dependants.
From the very first patient, the study
has demonstrated that with proper nutrition,
HIV patients suffering from
malnutrition have been able to double
their weight and improve their CD4
cells count rapidly.
So far, the programme has one of
its founding physicians nominated for
the prestigious Nobel Prize. Among the
crops grown through the project, are
fruits and a wide range of vegetables.
''We grow both traditional and exotie
crops which are locally acceptable and
available," says Steve Lewis, the project
director.
The fruits grown on various or~
chards include guavas, which grow
wildly in the region, oranges, avocados,
and tomatoes among others, while
vegetables including kales, cabbages,
cowpeas, amaranth, and all sorts of
traditional vegetable species.
"Some fruits like guavas are not
given serious considerations yet they
are very important in nutrition and are
high in vitamin C," says Faniee Komen
a nutritionist with the project.
During the six months of treatment
and food program, the patients are
enrolled in a programme which enables
them to achieve self~sufficiencythrough
skills training and micro financing of
private micro~enterprise.
<IThrough this, HIV~positive clients
are able to provide and care for their
families and children as well as develop
a new -sense of selt" esteem," says
Benjamin Andama, the FPI program
manager.
This has seen qver 3000 patients
graduate to a self-dependency level
since 2002. "Those who opted for
poultry projects are currently supply-
ing AMPATH with over 2000 eggs per
week, thus earning their daily bread
from it," says Andama.
Others have ventured into passion
fruit farming, tailoring, informal crea~
tivity and clay work. AMPATH cares for
.more than 50,000 HIV infected adults
and children, with nearly one-half of
all patients on anti·retroviral drugs,
and enrollment into the program rising
by 2,000 patients per month.
A robust program to prevent mother
to child transmission of HIV has been
initiated. Ail the AMPATH facilities
are operated by the Kenya Ministry
of Health in. Western Kenya and are
located in 18 government clinics.
- ISAIAH ESIPISU