20 MAR 2007

CASE FOR CONJUGAL VISITS IN PRISONS

Following "Family Day" at
the Shima la Tewa Prison
last week, conjugal visits
and Kenya's prisoner rights
to them, have many a Kenyan
person rather steamy, hot and
bothered" And I'm not just talking
about a prisoner like Mohamed Abdulralunan
who, while admitting to
having his body "on fire;' reportedly
begged the government for relief because
"I had really prepared for this
big day. I had expected to have private
moments with my beloved one
... even for 15 minutes ... I have been
languishing in prison for years (sexually
starved):'
Though now a topic of discussion in
Kenya, conjugal rights have for decades
been an issue of controversy
worldwide. They featured most recentlyin
Pakistan Vlhere, in a similar
plea to the federal government, Governor
Khalid Maqbool requested its
amendment of Prison Rules 1978 so
that prisoners can meet their spouses
in jail. The amendment to Section
545-A read in part that "a prisoner
convicted for a term exceeding five
years shall be allowed to keep with
him his spouse" and that "this right
maybe exercised three times in a year
for three consecutive days provided
that where a male convict has more
than one wife, each of them shall be
allowed to remain with the convict
for three consecutive days.. :'
Individuals like Kenya's Bishop Boniface
Lele would agree with this. Such
provisions, he has said, are important
for "enhancing marriage values" and,
without a doubt, this is true. Conjugal
visits have been credited with keeping
marriages intact and for easing
the burden of imprisonment on the
part of the prisoner's spouse. Yet, interestingly
enough, as history shows,
this right did not originate from such
considerations.
Conjugal visitations (at least in
American penal institutions) were
first heard of at the Mississippi State
Penitentiary (MSP) in Parchman as
early as 1918 though it is believed
they had probably been around since
1900. And the reason for their introduction?
James Parchman, the Prison
Warden and also Plantation Manager,
believed that blacks possessed an
insatiable sexual appetite and that,
by offering them sexual favours, he
could increase their output. Located
on approximately 18,000 acres, the
MSP is an agricultural enterprise
which, up until this day, produces,
consumes and sells all of its mvn produce.
Paving the way for the prison's
2006's harvesting of4,141,381 pounds
ofvegetables or its marketing of5,159
feeder hogs fetching $583,604 on
716,160 ofman hours worked, Parchman
built the prisoners "red houses"
next to the fields where they worked.
Here, they canoodled with wives and
girlfriends. Prostitutes, it is said, were
not an uncommon sight either.
In 1972, following years of increased
scrutiny, the "red houses" were ripped
down and replaced with modern facilities
· accompanied by institutionalised
processes limiting conjugal
rights to married prisoners alone.
MWENDEMWINZI
Today, California, Connecticut, New
Mexico, New York and Washington
permit such interactions. And MSP's
impact has stretched even further -
into Israel via Larissa Timbobler
and Yigal Amir. Remember him? You
should. It was he that assassinated
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin. Itwas
also he that, after a two-year petition,
won the right to consummate his
marriage only months before Rabin's
first memorial. He, the court decided,
was entitled to basic rights including
the right to fatherhood. During their
first such visit together, Larissa and
Yigal reportedly romped for a very
special eight-and-a-halfhours.
France and Canada welcome prisoners
into decorated home-like apartments
for such rendezvous and in
Russia well-behaved prisoners get
two annual visits lasting up to three
days each time. Is it not time perhaps
that Kenya, too, gave this some
thought?
While the country undoubtedly has
capacity issues to consider (there's
not enough space for prisoners
leave alone private areas required
for conjugal visits), there are several
reasons to think about it. If only for
dovvn the road. Conjugal visitation
programmes are believed to not only
curb prison-induced homosexuality
which, propelled by control or sexual
relief issues, contributes to the escalation
of HIV infection in prisons
worldwide (more so where condoms
are not distributed in prisons), but
they also inhibit recidlvism and the
re-assimilation into society through
their focus on family ties. Ties with
family members and other intimate
circles are of significant importance
to the inmate and their successful return
to society.
Yet that is not to say that such rights
should not be earned. These are, after
all, the same individuals who have no
regard for the law or society and who
have killed, molested, robbed and
maimed us! Extending them these
courtesies should not only be conditional
but also structured such that in
the long run, they benefit the broader
society..As is the case in the countries
Ties with members of
family and other intimate
circles are ofsignificant
importance to inrnat~s
and their successful
return to society
that offer them, conjugal rights must
be tied to certain requirements ofthe
prisoner. While these vary by prison
and country, they geIJ,erally revolve
around the length of thg" prisoner's
sentence, their behaviour (in some
instances there must be a record of
good behaviour for six months or
more) and the absence of sexually
transmitted diseases. When they are
accorded (and this is always in a controlled
setting), it is not because they
are viewed as a luxury but rather because
those extending them recognise
that prisoners, as people, constitute
part of society and that they
are, therefore, entitled to the basic,
natural rights that all humans enjoy.
It sounds simple enough, doesn't it?
Well, it's not.
Once they open this, countries are
being forced to contend with issues
rather unexpected. For instance,
should such rights be restricted to
spouses alone as is typically the case
or should partners and girlfriends
be qualified as well? And, speaking
of partners, what should happen in
the case of homosexuals? While this
thought might be too radical for the
average Kenyan today, it is noteworthy
that in Brazil, male prisoners are
eligible for visits from both heterosexuals
and, where applicable, homosexual
partners. Why? Because
even though an inmate has lost their
right to freedom, their partner still
has their right to intimacy without
resorting to divorce or adultery
mwendemwinzi@yahoo.com