Daily NATION 30 June, 2007

WOMENS HEALTH
Handling sexual debut among the youth
By SARAH ONYANGO

What would you tell your 16-year-old
daughter going on a week-loug school
trip if she got herself a double sleepingbag?
This is the dilemma a mother of a teenage girl
recently found herself in. Although she did not
want to expect or suspeCt the worst, her mind
was running fast. Sometbiugwas not right here,
especially since this trip included boys too.
She asked: "Why have you bought yourself
a double sleeping bag? Everyone will probably
briug their own bags?" .
"Just in case one of myfriends does~t, then
they can share mine;' she replied.
"Which of your friends would not.' have
aneT .'
"Mum~ .. just in case. You neverlmowwho"
might forget'~
The mother was not convinced, and she' was
worried. Thinking that she must act to sort out
the situation, she sat her daughter down and
quickly took her through key issues around
sex and sexuality; about being safe, about abstinence
and about unwanted pregnancies and
HIV/Aids, about self-esteem and self respect.
Not sure that this was enQugh to address the
problem, she got her daughtersome condoms
and pills. Just in case.
But when should we be talking to our children
about sexand sexuality; about their bodies,
and about wnat to expect as they grow older?
When should we be teaching them skills that
will ensure that they have all the confidence in
themselves; confidence enough to be able to say
no - until the right time.
Reproductive life
Sexual debut, or age at first sex, is an important
point in the sexual and reproductive life ofindi~
viduals. Earlysexual debut means increased risk
of exposure to sexually transmitted infections,
including HIV/Aids, increased risks ofunwanted
pregnancies and unsafe abortions. Studies
show that as the age at marriage increases, the
age of sexual debut remains the same.
This means that there is a longer 'Window
where young people are not in a stable relationship
or marriage, increasing the possible
exposure to sexual risks. Studies also showthat
early sexual debut increases sexual risk behaviours
throughout life, including the risk ofhaving
unprotected sex and having multiple and
casual sexual partners.
These risks once established areverydifficult
to reverse. Once sexually active, young people
have been. found to be less concerned about
safer sex and frequently have unprotected sex.
They prefer to use emergency contraception,
rather than a regular contraceptive, for many
reasons, including the many myths that exist
about contraception. They are also likely to
have abortions if they find themselves with an
unwanted pregnancy sometimes in the hands
of unskilled providers. Kenyan girls are having
their sexual debut at a very early age, according
to a study conductedbyInfotrack Research
and Consultant Company and disseminated
earlythis year. Over 70 per cent ofWomen aged
between 18 and 25 are no longer virgins and
girls are haviug their sexual debut as young as
12years of age - 9 per cent ofthose interviewed
in Nairobi.
There is need for concerted efforts to ensure
that childrep. and youth have access to quality
sexuality education programmes. Through
comprehensive education, notwithstanding
other social and economic factors, this will not
only increase knowledge about sex and sexuality;
but also empower the young people to be
~ble to make conscious decis~ons.
Sexuality education
Being well informed would discourage the
youug people from "discoveriug" for themselves
the risks of early sexual debut. Anysexuality education
programme must recognise. cultures,
morals and traditional values of communities
involved, While teaching youug people about
their bodies, about sexuality, building their
skills and self-confidence and dispelling myths
and misconceptions.
Sexuality education is the keyto delaying sexual
debut, and reducing the associated risks. It
must target both boys and girls.
There is also the need to promote youthfriendly
.sexual and reproductive health services,
where young people can receive couriselling
on sexuality, pregnancy, contraception and
other services in a non-judgmental environment.
Dealing with sex and sexuality issues of
young people should be the concerted efforts of
parents, teachers, religious leaders and community
members. The most importantthiug is that
there should be an adult who can have regular
dialogue on these issues with theyoung person
and earn their confidence.
sarah.onyango@ppfa.or.ke
