15TH MAY 2007

AFRICA TRADITIONAL HEALERS.

are located in nearly every rural village setting
as well as in the busy urban areas. Therefore,
they are a godsend to Africa's cash-strapped
health ministries since they are already "on
the ground':
Traditional healers in Africa are also
quite knowledgeable about HIV and Aids.
For example, urban traditional healers
in Tanzania know very well about the
opportunistic infections caused by HIV and
Aids and what herbal medicines can treat
them. They know too that a healthy diet and
treatment of sexually transmittable diseases
can greatly help in maintaining good health
for PL\-VH.As besides keeping HN-infection
at bay. Furthermore, they are also aware that
high fevers from malaria, for instance, can
weaken the body even further if one is HIVpositive.
They also tell their patients not to engage in
sexual activity because it cannot only further
the spread the virus but also weaken their
immune system. Even something as simple
as a massage can have great physical and
psychological benefits since it both relieves
PLVVHAs of excruciating pains in their
lower limbs but it also gives them existential
reassuran,ce since they know that few want to
touch someone with HIV and Aids.
Simply dishing out ARVs is not enough.
PLWHAs in Africa need appropriate
social counselling and "pyschic" support
and indigenous healers can provide the
appropriate emotional, psychological
spiritual counselling. For example, such
counselling would deal with reducing social
stigmatization (something that even PLWHAs
in the West continue to experience but is
offered little help from \Vestern biomedicine
and socialservices.
However, despite their knowledge and
popularity, traditional healers are given a
raw deal by Western medical experts. Usually
they are invited to week-long workshops
or seminars where they exchange views
and information "With health educators,
researchers, nurses and doctors. However, the
information flow is one-way-. the scientific
view is promoted by the "trainers" "With little
real input for these Africa specialists.
True collaboration, however, requires a
measure of respect for indigenous medicine
and African culture generally. It also requires
the shedding of stereotypes of African
traditional healers. Most important of all, say
experts, is the search for a common ground
between western biomedicine and traditional
healers and building upon that common
ground. Combining forces "With healers to
combat HIV and Aids and promote public
health makes good sense.
And yet most experts who work "With
traditional healers in sub-Saharan Africa
have found them most eager to collaborate
with Western biomedicine in public health
programs. Just the fact that they are
"omnipresent" in most settings in Africa
makes them ideal partners in spreading
important public health messages to larger
numbers of people
What more' can traditional healers do in the
fight against HIV and Aids? For instance, they
could be the ones to distribute the medicine
and ensure that patients take the right doses.
VlhiIe traditional healers will need to be
educated to do this, it will be less expensive
to upgrade their knowledge than to expand
the formal health system. Building on existing
systems seems to have a higher chance of
sustainability.
Healers could also give advice to PLWHAs
about psycho-social problems, stigma and
social marginalisation, diet and exercise,
avoiding alcohol and tobacco; despair and
depression; maintaining hope and spiritual
outstanding example of how positive results
can be achieved in the fight against Aids
by combining local expertise, indigenous
knowledge and modern health workers to
provide effective low-cost treatment for peopIe
living witb Aids.
TAWG has received international
recognition of its innovative work V1Tith
traditional healers, and has got support from
Oxfam, the World Bank and USAID.
Across the continent in West Africa there
is the Airica-wide Senegal-based NGO,
PROMETRA, which is presently coordinating
Aids programs that involve incligenous .African
healers throughout the continent.
Such indigenous strategies for dealing vvith
the ravages ofAids have not gone unrecognised
by the international community. For example,
in 1998, the World Bank launched the
Indigenous Knowledge for Development
program, which, in the words of former
World Bank President James D. Wolfensohn,
aimed "to help learn from communitybased
knowledge systems and development
practices and to incorporate them into WE
supported programs:'
The number of Western trained
doctors in Zambia 600 of whom
are foreign
_._---_.... --~--------_.-.-
Predates mollern medicine
However, this had not always been the bank's
position. Traditional healers in Africa, for
example, were considered to be irrelevant
to modernity and therefore to be excluded
from development. A similar reluctance
was initially found in the World Bank were
traditional healers' practices were often
perceived as lacking scientific validation,
and hence legitimacy. This view was also
widespread among western doctors, although
traditional health practices predates modern
medical practice just as the use of herbs and
medicinal plants predates modern medicine.
The joint United Nations Programme
on HIV and Aids (UNAlDS) and the World
Health Organization have recommended
that developing countries harness the
potential contribution oflocal resources and
knowledge-specifically, traditional medicine
(TRM) and its practitioners.
UNAIDS has also published a set of
guidelines aimed at empowering health
authorities, governmental and nongovernmental
organisations as weB as
community groups seeking to develop a
productive relationship between traditional
and conventional (biomedical) health
systems.
faith and not spreading the disease. Healers The Global Initiative for Traditional Systems
can, and often will promote and distribute (GIFTS) has accepted to lay the groundwork
condoms or sen them in eBD or social for a network of researchers and institutions
marketing programs. Ideally, however, to build a research program that will identify,
healers could be greatly influential in Primary assess and develop safe and effective local
Behaviour Change (PBC), the area of least treatments for HIV-related illnesses. The
progress ofHIVand Aids prevention programs program will use simplified but controlled
accorcling to recent evaluations of major HN clinical experiments to conduct rapid
and Aids prevention programs. investigations of promisingtreatments. It will
Healers remain popular despite abundant build databases for infonnation sharing on the
modern medicine because they have "Wisely success and failures of local treatments.
used an important economic contract to The pharmaceutical industry has also
the mutual benefit of their practice and the started to recognise the value of the ethnopopulation
they serve: They receive the buJkof medical approach to the search for new drugs
their payment only if the patient is cured. by researching on natural product medicines
EastMrica seems to have taken the lead. For already in use by traditional healers or entire
example, Uganda has embraced traditional indigenous populations.
and western medicine. Scores of medicinal plants that are used
Uganda was among the first (ifnot the first) daily in Africa and may have potential
countries in sub-Saharan Africa to develop effectiveness against opportunistic infections
pilot programs for treating HNpatients "With or indeed, Hm remain unknown or under
ARVs. However, the Traditional and Modern investigated. However, the medicinal plants
Heaith practitioners Together against Aids that Africa's traditional healers rely upon have
(THETA), the Ugandan NGO that promotes significantly decreased due to deforestation,
collaboration behveen traditional and modern cultivation, over grazing, burning, droughts
health practitioners in the fight against Aids desertfication. This problem has been
and which works very closely with Uganda's exacerbated by the un-managed local and
Ministry of Health. international demand for medicinal plants.
They recognise the fact that the vast How many millions of dollars in
majority of people in Africa first consult their development aid have been wasted on failed
traditional healers for a variety of diseases public health programs and how many
including STDs and HN. Furthermore, lives could have been saved if only Western
Uganda's Ministry of Health also recognises donors and policy-makers had a little more
that some ofthese local treatments do actually faith in Africa's traditional ways and gave
work in treating opportunistic infections. Mricans a real say in policy design and I
In Tanzania, the Tanga Aids Working implementation?
;~~':c~~~~~~t;~n~~I:x~~~~~~~~:~~e~~ AjTicaTnsigiliTs aninitiativeoTtheNaiio;;,1
indigenous knowledge. TAWG's work is an Media Group's Africa Media Network Project.