DAILY NATION TUesday June 5, 2007

SAs traditional
healers help
in Aids battle

Some ofthe doctors
tell patients drugs
are toxic and warn
against condom use
By REBECCA HARRISON
MTUBATUBA, South Africa, Monday

Tryphina Ngwenya slides a pink
condom over the magic wooden
stick normally used to conjure
up ancestral spirits, unleashing
a ripple of laughter among her audience
oftraditional South African healers.
('You see it's easy - there's nothing poisonous
or dangerous about condoms,"
she told the group of some 80 sangomas
- as traditional healers are locally known
- draped in brightly coloured wraps, animal
hides and beads.
Ms Ngwenya has recruited the sangomas
- sometimes called witchdoctors
- as foot soldiers in the fight against HIV;
which affects 40 million people worldwide,
has infected about one in three
adults iu this deeply traditional corner of
rural South Africa. She is teaching them
basic Aids awareness and prevention.
Many of the healers once believedHN
was a curse from the spirit world and patients
had been bewitched. Some claimed
they could cure Aids - and manywhohave
not been trained continue to claim this.
But while they still prescribe roots and
herbs for ailments and mutter incanta-'
tions to dispel evil spirits, these sangomas
now also issue condoms, refer patients to
clinics forHNtests and urge them to take
life-prolonging anti-retroviral drugs.
"Before, I didn't even know what this
HIV animal was, but the training has
brought sophistication to my work," said
Miriam Tembe, who has been consulting
the spirits fOI'tips on treating patients for
25 years.
The training helped her with the practice
of scarring a patient then rubbing
herbs or powder into the wound: "I used
to use one razor for five people - I used to
kill people;' she added. ''Now I teach them
how to protect themselves:'
The project linking traditional practioners
with modern health systems is
being run by African Medical and Research
Foundation (AMREF), which says
more than two-thirds of people in rural
Africa consult sangomas before attend~
ing a clinic.
Sangomas are revered and trusted in
rural communities and play multiple
roles as spiritual guide, healer and counsellor.
Mostlybut not always woman, they
might offer tips to a young couple on their
sex life, advise on proper burial rites, or
concoct a treatment for toothache - all
in a day.
AMREF wants sangomas to keep providing
spiritual succour and basic healthcare,
and also to use their influence and
authority to promote HIV-testing and
modern medicine in areas where many
people are distrustful of hospitals, clinics
and ARV drugs.
"Traditional healers are so important
in these communities. People trust them
more than they trust us nurses;' said Ivy
Mdletshe, a nurse whoworks in AMREF's
HN testing centre. Zandile Bnkhosini
has benefited from the system. When her
feet swelled up and she developed a hacking
cough she assumed she had been bewitched
and went straight to see Tembe
- her local sangoma. Fortunately, Tembe
knewhowto spot the symptoms oftuberculosis,
which often accompanies HIVinfection.
She consulted the spirit world as
usual, then sent Bnkhosini for anHNtest.
The results were positive.
"When Miriam sent me for a test I was
sceptical, but her medicine hadhelped me
before so I decided to trust her;' said the
25-year-old., hunched inside a mud and
straw hut, the bitter aroma ofburning incense
wafting from the corner.
NoW; With Tembe's support, Bukhosini
is taking anti-retroviral drugs and looks
happy and healthy.
"Miriam encouraged me to take the
medicine the doctors gave me;' she said.
"But she also gives me her own treatment
and tells me if I need to slaughter a chicken
to appease the ancestors:'
The AMREF project has particular
resonance in South Africa, where Health
Minister Manto Tshabalala-Msimang has
angered Aids activists by appearing to
question accepted science and emphasising
treatments such as lemon, garlic and
the African potato.
Ms Ngwenya insists the two approaches
are not mutually exclusive, and argues
sangomas can help treat some of the side
effects ofHN- such as skin problems or
coughs and colds c aud break down the
stigma attached to it.
"Obviously there is not a traditional
healer who can cure Aids but they can
help treat the symptoms and help support
patients by giving them what they
want to believe;' she said.
But she also says much more must be
done. An esthnated 200,000 traditional
healers are practising in South Mrica
- there are almost 900 in this small district
of some 200,000 people - and organisations
likeAMREFhave trained just
a handful.
Manyhealers still tell patients anti-retroviral
drugs are toxic, condoms are infested
with disease-carrying worms and
killing a goat will appease ancestral
spirits and cure the sick And while
a few weeks of basic training can
halt dangerous practices like razorsharing,
healers may continue to
promote traditional methods over
modern medicine.
But most sangomas see little conflict
between the two approaches,
and say learning about orthodox
healthcare has helped improve their
traditional practice. "How can the
ancestors be angry with me?" said
sangoma Phillle Gumbi when asked
what the spirits thought when she
encouraged patients to turn to modern
medicine: "Both me and the hospitals
are doing the same thing - we
are saving lives:' (Reuters)
