DAILY NATION Monday June 4, 2007

CONSTITUTION

Judge disqualified from case
on HIV positive employee

On the question of a judge to disqualify himself
on grounds of bias, the issue to consider is not
the mind of the particular jUdge. Rather, it is
the ilnpression given to other people. Even if
the judge was as impartial as could possibly
be, if right-minded people would think the circumstances
were such
hood of bias on his part, then the judge should
not:-rS Ltd,'Dr Primus Ochieng and MetropoH"
I1 Health ,
test on her and disclosing her status to Homepark andJnuch more.
without her prior, informed consent. w~.kenyalillN,oxg
She also asked the court to declare that she outlook@nation.co.ke
was entitled to reinstatement as an employee of _~l:Imin@!tenyalaw.org
Homepark and to compensation.
Save for certain interlocutory matters that
arose, the hearing of the case was presided over
by Justice J.B Ojwang. Jasmine was represented
byMr Otiende Amolo,
Previously, in 2001, the Attorney-General had
appoiuted a National Thsk Force on HIV-Aids to
give opinion, fonnulate policies and guidelines
and make recommendations on legal issues relatiug
to HIV and Aids.
The Task Forces' work culminated in a report
containing recommendations on legal and policy
issues' on' HIV and Aids. The report led to the
passing ofthe HIVaud Aids Prevention and Control
Act, 2006, Act No 14, which had uot yet.been
brought into effect.
Advocate ArnoUo and a Ms Catherine Mumma,
one of the principal witnesses in the suit, had
been joint secretaries to the Task Force. Also, Justice
Ojwang had been one of the consUltants for
the Task Force. He had repOltedly shared a forum
of the 'l'JBk Force with both Mr Amollo and Ms
Mumma, where he had presented a paper on HIVAids.
He was said to have publicly supported the
cause of the Task Force.
Both the report of the Thsk Force and the Act
touch on issues of Aids vis a vis the light to privacy
and confidentiality, the workplace, human
lights and use of language sensitive to HIV and
Aids issues.
- 'l c the hearing of the case was pending
""wang, Homepark brought this

petitionin-th@ COHstitHtioaaJ Court, Giting-s@{}tions
70, 77(9) and (10), 84(1) ofthe Constitution,
Homepark's advocate argued that considering
the similarity between the issues which Justice
Ojwang was required to decide in the case and the
recommendations of the Task Force, of which he
had been a consUltant, the judge may have a bias
to certain positions or inclinations that the Task
Force dealt with,
Homeparkfelt that it would not get a fair hear~
ing. It feared· that because there was no law in
force governing HIVand Aids, the judge was likely
to determine the case basedon his own perception
ofissues, since his mind mayalreadyhave the
predisposition of a consultant ofthe Task Force.
Homepark asked the Constitutional Court to
declare that trial of the case by Justice Ojwang
amounted to an infringement of its lights. It also
sought an order that the case should proceed before
a different judge of the High Court.
Homepark said;that proceedings presided by
Justice Ojwangwere unlikely to satisfy the test,of
an independent and impartial court provided for
in section 77 ofthe Constitution.
The petition was opposed on several grounds
and on a preliminary objection. Among these
grounds were the arguments that Constitutional
Court judges had no jurisdiction to supervise
another jndge of the High Court and that
Homepark, being a company rather than a nahlral
person, had wrongly invoked a procedure re-
served to individuals.
In their unanimous opinion delivered on May
25,2007, Justices J,G Nyamu and R Wendoh first
disposed ofthe procedural issues. Regardingtheir
jurisdiction to hear the petition, they observed
that the special judsdictiou vested in the High
Court under section 84ofthe Constitution waS an
original'bneto protect fundamental rights.Itwas,
therefore; a special jurisdiction which is binding
on all organs of the government.
On the standing of Homepark to file the petition,
the judges noted that the definition of a
"person" under section 123 of the Constitution
included incorporated. and un".incorporated.associations.
Such entities inay articulate their fundamen~
rights in Court, proVided the contravention
forwhich they have filed the proceedings is
inreljl,tiqn t() them.
. .' While a company woUld not be able to iuvok~
the right to liberty, because the light cannot: be
effectively and naturally attached to a c:orporate
body, it can assert its right to afairhearing before
anindep~ndenttribunal: '-'" '.':
Therefore, Homeparkwas,nottc{be prevented
from seeking the remedies iteIairn,ed merely' oil
account of it being a corporate body.", :':
The judges then summaiised thelit41~stestt9
be applied on the main question ofthe:,sllitability
of Justice Ojwang to preside over thecase: ili
consideling whether there was a real likelihood
ofbias, the comt does not look at the mind of the
palticular judge.
It does not look to see'ifthere was a reallikelihood
that the judge would favour one side at the
expense of the other~TPecourt looks at the impression
which would be given to other people.
Even if the judge was as impartial as could be,
if right-minded people would think that the circumstances
were such that there was a reallikea
lihood of bias, then the jndge should not preside
over the case.
The judges found out that the issues which
were before Justice Ojwang were substantially
the matters reflected or contained in the report
of the Task Force and the HIV Aids Prevention
and Control Act. The judge's role as a consultant
and the alleged public expression of opinion, as
well as the sharing of a platfonn byoue ofthe advocates
and the plincipal witness for the plaintiff,
did in fact, whether tightly or wrongly, identify
him with the Task Force's repolt.
This made him unfit to continue with the hearing.
Where there isreasonable or apparent appre~
hension of danger ofbias, a COUlt would not satisfy
the requirements of independence and impar~
tiality under section 77(9) of the Constitution,
Accordingly, Justices Nyamu and Wendoh
granted the declarations and orders sought by
Homepark and ordered that the case file before
Jnstice Qjwang shouldbe transmitted to the Chief
Justice for reallocation to another judge.

Reported by Michael Murungi