DAILY NATION Thursday June 14, 2007

DSW LAUNCHES
YOUTH-FRIENDLY MOBILE VCT

VCT ON WHEELS TO HELP YOUTH COMBAT HIV/AIDS

By EVANS ONGWAE
help youth
combat
wheels to
he country's youth now have a
chance to grab the HIV/AIDS
challenge by the horns and wrestle
it to the ground. Young people, the
most at risk against the HIVlArDS threat, are
being empowered with tools with which to
fight back and save their Jives.
The German Foundation for World
Population (DSW) today launches mobile
youth-friendly voluntary counselling and
testing (VeT) services targeted at the
nation's youth. The non-governmental
organization will take these services right to
the young people's doorsteps in its ongoing
efforts to stem the HIVjAIDS tide.
The launch at Safari Park Hotel officially
kicks off this three-year project funded
by the European Union to the tune of
Sh.256,621,SOO covering a period of three
years.
The project is meant to enhance
preventive behaviour to bring about a
significant reduction in HIV /AIDS prevalence
rates among the youth aged between 12
- 24 years.
It aims at providing voluntary counselling
and testing services to 36,000 youth
within a period of three years and building
the capacity of both public and private in
preventiGn, care and support systems.
Expected to grace the launch, are the
Minister for Health, the German Ambassador
to Kenya (who is the representative of the EU
Presidency in Kenya) and the Head of the EU
delegation among other dignitaries.
This initiative is meant to bridge the gap
for an unmet need for VCT services in the
country and especially among the youth.
The vast majority of people living with HIV
still do not know their status. This is despite
Kenya having been noted for achievements
in battling the HIV epidemic. A recent decline
in national prevalence seems to underline
the country's successful approach in the war
against the pandemic.
According to the 2003 Kenya Demographic
and Health Survey, only 14 per cent of men
and 13 per cent of women aged 15-49 years
have tested for HIV. Despite massive national
campaigns, there remains a large unmet
need for HIV testing and counselling.
For those individual, who do not seek
routine or curative health services, VCT
remains an essential mechanism through
which they can learn about their HIV status
and reduce HIV transmission. Research
conducted in Kenya by the johns Hopkins
University, School of Hygiene and Public
Health estimates that one VCT prevents
1,104 infections.
Using four trucks, DSW will run mobile
VCT services - or "VCT on wheels" - aimed
at reaching young people who shy away
from visiting normal stationary facilities to
establish their HIV status and obtain other
services or are discouraged by distance.
The basis of this new component of DSW's
work revolves around four mobile trucks,
which will be fully equipped and fabricated
to suit a youth-friendly VCT service. The
trucks will be operational within four Kenyan
provinces, namely Coast, Central, Western/
Rift Valley and Nyanza, thus bringing VCT
services to the young people, rather than
letting them invest time, money and energy
into locating a VCT.
The programme is being implemented
in 16 districts in Kenya in Eastern, Nairobi,
Coast, Western and Nyanza Provi nces. The
districts covered under the program are
Nairobi, Bondo, Migori, Kisumu, Kakamega,
Bungoma, Trans-Nzoia, Mumias Butere, Kilifi,
Kwale, Mombasa,
Kaloleni, Meru
Central, Meru South,
Embu and Kirinyaga.
The mobile
VCT programme
encompasses
components of
four mobile VCT
trucks, support to
existing static VCTs,
home-based care,
peer education and
creating awareness
on adolescent sexual
and reproductive health (ASRH). services for
young persons in targeted districts among
others.
This innovative component is a DSW
addition to its youth-friendly programmes
in the country offered under the Youth-toYouth
banner.
The initiative is aimed at enhancing
awareness and knowledge about HIV/AID5
and VCTs through community mobilisation
and sensitization. It will make available
youthMfriendly, approachable and affordable
VCTs.
Further, the project will establish a
community home-based care support
and referral network. It will also deliver
high quality VCT servicesthrough quality
assurance.
Young people, particularly vulnerable
to HIV for social, cultural, biological, and
economic reasons, often feel threatened
by the idea of going to VCTs, which to date
have been more adult-orientated. These
are perceived to be 'scary' entities and are
associated with being tools of extensive
stigmatisation.
The cost and distance involved in
accessing a VCT also pose an obstacle,
contributing little to bringing down
prevalence rates among young people,
especially the most vulnerable and least
accessible.
Although VCT services are at the heart of
this project, DSW covers more than only one
component along the chain of HIV infection.
Prevention through youth-club based
education and awareness campaigns, as well
as post-infection care through youth-friendly
home-based care form the remaining two
pillars of this project. In line with D5W's Y2Y
approach, this project is run by youth for
youth.
Access to HIV/AIDS prevention and care
services, as well as accompanying awareness
activities provided through this project are
envisaged to significantly reduce HIVjAIDS
prevalence amongst the most vulnerable and
f!larginalised young people, particularly girls
and young women.
However, the project also aims tobring
about positive change in behavioural
standards that go beyond HIV/AIDS
prevention.
Among these are young people's attitude
towards negative societal influences and
harmful customs that have contributed
to the mass spread of HIV/Aids and other
reproductive health ailments. Such variation
in thought, attitude and behaviour will go a
long way in directing young people to lead a
healthier life and ultimately contribute to the
general well-being of society.