SUNDAY NATION June 24, 2007

CATHOLIC HIV AND AIDS CONFERENCE
FIRST NATIONAL CATHOLIC AIDS CONFERENCE AND THE LAUNCH OF THE CATHOLIC NATIONAL AIDS POLICY
25-28 JUNE AT THE KENYA INSITUTE OF EDUCATION NAIROBI

Church in action against pandemic

Message from the Most Rev. John Njue,
Chairman, Kenya Episcopal Conference.
The preparation of the national Catholic
AIDS policy 'This We Teach and Do' has
been in many ways a journey of faith. This
has necessitated a deeper examination of
the nature of the challenge of HIVjAIDS in the face
of over twenty years of the Church's experience in
the broad arena of service delivery, in Preventive
and Curative measures and the complex problem
of orphans & vulnerable children
While the way forward has not always been
clear, the Church has never hesitated to provide
service and leadership even in difficult areas
despite limited resources. We have provided care
for the sick, prevention programs particu larly for
the youth, mother to child prevention programs
and assistance to OVCs.
While doing all these we have, in reviewing
our actions, our successes and our failures, felt
the need to work out clear guidelines and broad
strategies to provide a roadmap for our various
parishes, diocesan institutions and national
structures upon which many Kenyans rely for
various types of support and services,
Catholic HIV and AIDS Policy in Kenya, is thus
meant to
The Most Rev.
John Njue
(1.)Give a collective sense of direction, overall
guidance. justification and reflection on the
Church practice with regard to HIVjAIDS.
(2.) Acknowledge what has been done so
far, encourage grassroots initiatives and give
structure for responses and programmes at all
levels.
(3.) Serve as a point of reference, provide a
framework and elaborate answers on difficult
issues,
The Policy is thus both timely and needed and it
will be an appropriate conclusion to the end of the
first ever National Catholic AIDS Conference.
It is my sincere hope that all the participants
in the conference will examine the practicability
of the Policy and share the acquired knowledge
with all agents of evangelization and partners who
provide us with assistance in many ways.
This policy will also be of particular use to
those who have to deal with challenging situations
everyday, whether the challenge be moral, spiritual,
psychological or material- for the faces of HIVj
AIDS are many and everyone is called to action.
As the Policy so pointedly states 'We in all
Church efforts to prevent HIV from spreading, to
heal illness and soothe suffering and to address
the painful consequences of the pandemic,
the duty of everyone involved - bishops, clergy,
religious, faithful - is to spread the Gospel and
form consciences in the light of these values".
Therefore, we recommit ourselves to be faithful to
Jesus Christ in responding to the challenges posed
by both sexuality and stigma.
In fidelity to the Gospel, our struggle against
AIDS should never erode but always enhance the
dignity and worth of each human person. And in
response to the HIV pandemic, the Church carries
out her mission at every level. We recognize and
appreciate the impressive efforts made by many
Dioceses, Parishes, Congregations and the Faithful
in responding generously, often under difficult
circumstances,
We join Pope John Paul II of venerable memory
in recalling "with admiration the many health~care
workers, chaplains and volunteers who, like Good
Samaritans, assist persons with AIDS and care for
their relatives.' In this regard, the service of the
thousands of Catholic health~care institutions that
go to the help of people in Africa afflicted by every
kind of illness, and especially by AIDS, malaria and
tuberculosis, is invaluable,"
We appreciate, thank and bless the clergy, the
reiigious and the faithful involved in the ministry
of the sick, in education and formation of youth, in
pastoral duties and home~based care, in projects
large and small.
We appreciate the efforts being made in HIV
and AIDS programmes by governmental and nongovernmental
institutions when they encourage
abstinence and fidelity as well as care for people
living with HIV and AIDS,
We honour the many families, widows, widowers
and communities taking holistic care of their sick
with much love and sacrifice. We thank the families
and institutions who care for orphans.
We applaUd the efforts made by Kenyan medical
personnel, both modern and trad'itional, in treating
and caring for people living with HIV and AIDS; and
by the counseliors who give hope to the infected.
We wholeheartedly support the involvement
of conscientious parents, teachers, and religious
leaders who take to heart the instruction
and moral formation of children, youth and
communities.
In conclusion and on behalf of the Kenya
Episcopal Conference, I wish to invite us ali to take
a deep look at the national Catholic AiDS policy for
therein is a portion for each one of us. It lays the
foundations for what we have been doing, what we
are doing and what we shali continue doing.
A life full of promise: Mombasa ave Project
'J,
--I
and intelligent choices for themselves.
It was th'ls task force on cross cutt'lng issues
which prepared the ground for the institution
of Kenya Catholic HIVjAIDS Taskforce (KCHAT)
as a technical advisory think tank for
the Kenya Episcopal Conference, which was
commissioned during the plenary assembly of
the Kenya Episcopal Conference in November
2006. K-CHAT brought together several Catholic
Organizations who are major players or have a
special interest in HIV/AIDS with the Secretary
General as Chairman. I w'lsh to thank all those in
K-CHAT both organizations and individuals for a
job well done.
The meeting of AMECEA (Association of
Member Episcopal Conferences in Eastern Africa)
in Kampala, Uganda in 2005 bringing together
Episcopal Conferences of Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya,
Tanzania, Uganda, Sudan, Malawi and Zambia,
had HIVJAIDS as the main agenda.
The AMECEA Bishops agreed that every
Conference rolls out the recommendations and
picks up its priorities in the area of HIVjAIDS
for the next three years (till the next AMECEA
meeting in Zambia in 2008), Consequently, the
Kenya Episcopal Conference chose the following
priority areas of development.
(1.) Leadership Commitment by organizing
workshops for all Church leaders, clergy,
Religious and Lay Leaders for training
capacity and awareness of HIVjAIDS. The
KEC undertook to encourage more Lay
participation in HIVjAID activities for
prevention of infection, care for those
affected, and training of more counselors.
(2.) Advocacy enhancement by working out
National HIVjAIDS policy for the Catholic
Church and pushing for enhancement of laws
jlegal framework to protect hose infected and
affected by the HIVjAIDS pandemic.
(3.) Resource Mobilization by working out
common partnerships at Local, National and
International levels.
KEC mandated the Kenya Catholic Secretariat
to execute these priorities. Significant progress
in the three areas of concern has been made;
and with the assistance of K~CHAT, managed to
come up with the Kenya Catholic HIVjAIDS Policy
'This We Teach and Do' which is n_ow ready for
launching.
Other achievements include the rolling out of
projects to provide Anti-Retroviral Therapy to
over 30,000 persons and PMTCT programmes
to over 100,000 expectant mothers. A lot
still remains to be done. This requires the
Collaboration of all stakeholders and indeed we
all are.
As we celebrate 20 years of intensive
commitment to stopping the spread of HIVjAIDS,
we wish to call upon all persons of good will to
work closely with the Catholic. Church to help roll
out assistance in all areas to reach out to more
needy people.
Cross-cutting Issue
1
In the year 2003 when the KEC - Catholic
Secretariat undertook to prepare its strategic
plan for the years 2004 - 2008, it was clearly
seen that there was a necessity to manage
the HIVjAIDS Epidemic in a more cross cutting
manner as it impacted on the lives of people
in a multiplicity of ways. Though primarily
a health issue, HIVjAIDS was noted to also
impact extensively on economic issues - such as
poverty and productivity; on education, social
development, lives of children, family and several
other areas of life.
A serious attempt to address this cross
cutting aspect of the epidemic was made with a
inter-commission task force being set up to look
into modalities of effecting this. This taskforce
made several recommendations including the
need to ensure that various aspects of HIVjAIDS
were captured in the various Commissions with
the KEC- Catholic Health Commission providing
technical back up to the other Commissions.
The KEC~ Catholic]ustice & Peace Commission
was to pick up issues related to justice, access
to drugs, as well as address the impact of issues
likely to fuel the spread of HIV such as wars,
displacement of persons due to conflicts etc;
the Education Commission picked up training of
youth in school on abstinence, delay of the sexual
debut among school children, access of orphans
to schooling: the Caritas Social development
Commission started rolling out income
generating activities for PLWAS especially
women in order to address the increasing
poverty arising from chronic illness and loss of
capacity to earn sufficient income to keep house
holds running; the Social Communications
Commission took up the challenge of continuing
to create awareness among the people as well
as educating and updating the public on new
developments and therapies; the Pastoral and
Lay Apostolate Commission continued its youth
related programs either directly or through
special projects such as Education for Life which
empower young people to make life affirming'
Message from Very Rev. Fr. Vincent
Wambugu, Secretary General, Kenya
Episcopal Conference - Catholic Secretariat
education, passed well and through the project got a
sponsor who pays her secondary education; she is in form
two.
Her younger sister is in primary school and is fully supported
by the project while her elder sister has been linked to
another sponsor to help her through secondary education.
They all stay with their maternal auntie a village away from
their own home. Priscilla and her sisters are bright children
who aspire to take up various professions on finishing
school and are grateful to the Archdiocese of Mombasa and
Christain Relief Services for all the support they receive.
Very Rev. Fr.
Vincent Wambugu
Rt. Rev. Philip
Sulumeti
The project has been able to consistently offer seryices to
all the 20,000 OVC and 7,480 caregivers in Kilifi district, All
7,480 households were offered counselling and guidance
while the 12,200 OVC in primary school were supported
with school equipment, uniforms and levies for3,555
children in Early Childhood Development Centres (ECD).
Under economic strengthening, a total of 385 ove were
placed in various village polytechnics for training in gainful
skills through the vocational-training initiative. Other forms
of support include medical services and food assistance to
households in need.
Three years down the line, Priscilla completed primary
Our message to them is, "the Church in Kenya has
spoken, go and do whatever is necessary to bring
about hope and relief to your fellow Kenyans,
It is true that most if not all our 44 major hospitals
spread allover Kenya offer subsidized or free
Anti-retrovirals; it is true that close to 100 Health
Units including health centres offer services in
the prevention of mother to child transmission
of HIV; it is true that many orphans find refuge in
our children's homes and child survival programs;
it is true that many youth are given life affirming
abstinence messages from our programmes
such us Education for Life and Abstinence and
Behaviour-change for Youth (ABY). But all these are
far from enough,
As a Church, we need to learn better ways of
rolling out programs even faster to all who need our
assistance. We need to challenge ourselves to build
our capacities to provide more excellent services.
I We need to re-dedicate ourselves to provide
I services with ever greater compassion. We have
come a long way but we need to go even further.
The needs of orphaned children get more acute
every day. Many persons who need ART have yet to
be reached, Many pregnant mothers are yet to be
availed of the life saving service of PMTCT.
The conference provides us with an opportunity
to stop a while, to share and celebrate our services,
learn new and better methods of service delivery
and then - move on with greater confidence.
As is stated in the National Catholic AIDS policy,
"Thus the Church wants to reach out to PLWHA,
whether Catholic or not, in an integral. evangelical
and holistic way. The first step is to appreciate their
situation and value the potential each one has.
PLWHA need to be both challenged and helped to
live positively and to play their role in the Church's
life and ministry. Attending greatly to children and
youth who are our future and to families, we want
to offer special attention and care to orphans and
to child-headed households".
Allow me in conclusion to thank all the conveners
who have worked tirelessly to make this conference
a reality, those who assisted materially and
technically', African Jesu'lt Network (AJAN), Catholic
Relief Services (CRS), Trocaire, GTZ amongst
others.
It is with their partnership and collaboration
that we are able to make real our mission to
respond with love to those infected and affected by
HIV&AIDS
Let us learn to encourage
I.
Fourteen year old Priscilla Maitha is benefiting from the
Orphans and Vulnerable Children project implemented by
th-e Archdiocese of Mombasa. The second born in a family
of three girls, Priscilla lost both parents six years ago and
was left under the care of an uncle whose wife did not like
Pricilla and her two siblings.
Unwanted by her relatives and with no home, Priscilla
and her siblings went to Samba Catholic Church where with
the help of the parish management committee, they were
assessed and recruited to the avc p'roject for support.
A village community health worker volunteered to offer
shelter to the children for a short period while the project
intervened to get a willing relative who could offer shelter
and care.
Message from Rt. Rev Philip Sulumeti
-Chairman of the KEC~CatholicHealth
Commission
First allow me to thank all the members of Kenya
Catholic AIDS Taskforce- K-CHAT who, with
the Kenya Episcopal Conference are the main
conveners of this conference, K-CHAT has been
mandated by the Catholic bishops of Kenya to:
(1.) Represent Church-related HIVjAIDS
personnel, programmes and projects, to serve as
a permanent forum where they can meet and let
others know what they are doing, and to cluster
them in a network of mutual support.
(2.) As a coalition within the Church, offer
support to our Bishops, Priests and other Church
leaders and ministers in their efforts to combat
HIVjAIDS,
To carry out this mandate K- CHAT foresaw
and worked towards a major gathering of various
catholic stakeholders and service providers and
thus to convene this conference whose objectives
are'
• To learn about foundations of Catholic AIDS
ministry.
• To review and celebrate the twenty years of
Catholic AIDS minisfry since The Challenge of
AIDS released by KEC in 1987.
• To share what we are doing,
• To disc;.over what others in Kenya are doing to
stem the AIDS pandemic, especially government
policy and practice
• To launch This We Teach and Do throughout
the Church in Kenya and to bring the Policy to
all those carrying forward the Church's AIDS
ministry,
• To enhance collaboration and networking
amongst everyone involved in the Church's AIDS
ministry,
• To communicate a more positive image of the
Church's loving and compassionate response to
those infected and affected.
On behalf of the Kenya Episcopal Conference, I
am happy to invite all of you to be part of various
plenary sessions, the numerous special interest
sess'lons as well as the break out sessions to d'lscuss
the Catholic AIDS Policy,
The Policy itself will be officially launched at the
end of the Conference. We are encouraging the
conference participants to "Know it thoroughly so
that you can not only use it well, but be in a position
to share its contents authoritatively with others."