NATION WEDNESDAY JUNE 6, 2007

LIVING POSITIVELY
THE VERY REAL FEAR OF DEATH

Why it is important to make use of the
time we have with our loved ones instead
of waiting for signs of trouble to start
making frenzied telephone calls

YOU would be forgiven for thinking
that death doesn't scare me one bit,
having lived with HIV for almost 20
- years now. What is trueis that I experience
death among our members on an
almost weekly basis.
What is false: I have- never been numb
to the pain and desolation the Equal
Reaper causes, regardless of the number
of deaths I've seen since I tested HIV positive.
The truth is that the pain hits me with
a thud every time, especially when I come
across disinherited and disempowered
widows and orphans.
The issue of mortality held the better
part of my mind captive when I had to
go to South Africa last month for an HIV
conference,
Deathly scenes
My trip came hot on the heels ofthe tragic
Kenya Airways accident in Cameroon-.
There was just no way I could turn a blind
eye to the deathly scenes playing in my
mind's eye. I am human, after all.
Mine was a natural reaction that, f
~n.checKed,w:?_uld have caused me t
miss thetrIP and the wondrous opp
nities that awaited me in South Africa. I
remembered one American commenting
after the World Trade Centre's twin towers
had collapsed:
"By not boarding aeroplanes and not
going to skyscrapers, we will only be playing
into the hands of these terroristsand
that way they will have won a psychological
battle."
Like I said,l have lived with HIV for almost
two decades, yet I've never been as
apprehensive aboutmy mortality as I was
before al1d during this particular trip.
I did things I don't normally do, like
voice as cairn as I could. “I just thought ¡t
would be nice to say this to you, Mum: I
love you.’ .
I might as well have cancelled the trip
and säved myself the mental anguish I
was going through. But, just like that per
;SOfl said after 9/11, by doing that I would
.:häve been ac ard refusing to go on
. with life becäuse of irrational fears.
I’m not saying we should tun blindly
into dáiigeñbüt theVë is a Uilterence
betweën somethiiig that’s real and some
thing that’s perceived, especially if the
latter is borA ou tot phobia. ..
In thØ säma wäy, sorneof us refuse to
get on with Cur lives because a terrorist
called +11V has stolen our immunity and
