DAlLY NATION Friday July 6, 2007

Female condom use defended

Device is not easily
accessed and women
do not know how to
use it, meeting told

By CAROLINE WAFULA

Delegates at an international meeting
have dismissed claims that
women do not like the female
condom.
Criticism of the condom tended to be
based on the fact that few women in African
countries had access to it and not
many had been educated on its use, said
the delegates at the World Young Women
ChristianAssociation (YWCA) meeting in
Nairobi.
The executive director ofthe Joint Uuited
Nations Progranune on HIV and Aids
(UNAids), Dr Peter Piot, called on donors
and governments to increase investment
in female-initiated methods of HN and
Aids prevention, citing the female condom
and microbicides as some of those
that needed priority. The female condom
must be fully funded and research on microbicides
boosted, Dr Piot said at the official
opening of the YWCA International
Women's Summityesterday.
"We need to do better in terms of action
that is relevant for women;' he said.
Statistics indicate that only one female
condom was available for every 100
women ofreproductive age inAfrica, Asia
and Latin America last year.
Reproductive health experts said research
showed that women would demand the condom as an HNprevention
product if they had access to it and were
shown howto use it.
Women raised concern on whether· it
was safe to use the female condom·more
than once, due to its high cost.
It also emerged that the devicemayonly
be accessed bythe high and middle class,
mostly in urban areas, shutting out those
in rural areas and slums. '
Organisations such as the World Health
Organisation (WHO), the Uuited Nations
Population Fund (UNFPA), Population
Services International and Family Health
International work closely with governments
to provide the female condom in
various countries at a reduced cost.
Loose mora.ls
UNAids senior women and Aids advocacy
officer PaulineMuchina said a positive
image of the female condom was key to
promoting its acceptability.
''Many women still don't know about
the condom because there has not been
enough awareness on it," she said.
The issue of stigma also arose, with
women saying they feared buying or carrying
condoms. Many shy away from asking
for it for fear of being branded prostitutes
or of loose morals, according to observations
raised by delegates.
Reducing costs
Women who took part in the discussions
at Kenyatta International Conference
Centre (DCC) said increased financial
investment in female condoms by donors
and governments would greatly bring
down the cost to affordable levels.
An official of the Female Health Company
in London, which manufactures the
condom, said the firm expected to ship 25
million condoms to various countries this
year, up from 20 million last year.
Mr Robbie Nelson said the number of
female condoms the company manufactured
yearly had risen by between 20 and
40 per cent in the past four years.
He said the number was small, compared
to six billion male condoms distributed
every year.
