DAILY NATION Thursday June 14, 2007

DSW LAUNCHES
YOUTH-FRIENDLY MOBILE VCT

German Foundation for World
Population (DSW) seeks to
economically empower youth
to shun behaviours that
expose them to reproductive health
risks. This is over and above providing
sexual and reproductive health services
and information to young people.
The poor economic status of
many young people in the country
compromises their ability to tackle
sexual and reproductive health
challenges.
Young people today face many
reproductive health challenges which
include sexually transmitted infections,
HIV/AIDS, teenage pregnancy, unsafe
abortion, school dropout. harmful
practices like early marriages, female
genital mutilation, sexual violence,
and.drug and substance abuse among
others.
Reproductive health education must
deal with the broader context of sexual
behaviour, Economic disadvantage
significantly affects young people's
sexual behaviour and experiences in a
number of ways. Although exchanging
sex for money, goods or favours is what
springs to mind, recent research shows
that a wide range of risky behaviours is
influenced by poverty. In addition to the
fact that being from a poorer household
increases the likelihood of exchanging
sex, it also:
" raises a young woman's chances of
experiencing non-consensual sex
• increases the likelihood of having
multiple sex partners (both men and
women)
• lowers the chances of secondary
abstinence
• decreases the likelihood of condom
use during the last sexual intercourse
and
• lowers the average age of first
sexual experience for boys and girls.
Furthermore, impoverished young
people, especially young women,
are the most disadvantaged when it
comes to discussing sensitive topics
such as condom use with their sexual
partners. Enhancing negotiation and
communication skills is a starting point,


Empowering young people for
improved reproductive health

but young people also need strategies
for building economic and social assets.
What DSW is doing to
economically empower
young people
As part of DSW's Youth-to-Youth
(Y2Yj programme, youth clubs are
given assistance in identifying viable
income generating activities (IGAs).
Young people receive training on the
development and management of
IGAs, and specialised skills training, if
necessary.
They are then provided with a small
start-up funding, as a no-interest loan.
Once the initial investment has
been recouped and the loan repaid
(which is then used as seed funding
for another club), the clubs themselves
decide how best to use the proceeds of
their activities to further support club
activities.
Income generating opportunities
cover a wide range of activities,
including traditional bee-keeping,
poultry-rearing weaving, but also
theatre and internet cafes.
Through the provision of transport
services, public showers, barber shops
and related low capital services, IGAs
also benefit entire communities by
filling gaps in and supporting essential
community services.
One youth club in Uganda chose
poultry as an IGA. Roosters and hens
were bought, and after selling enough
eggs and chicks to repay the loan,
club members decided to give each of
the young people involved in the IGA
one hen and one rooster for own use.
The remaining birds were kept and
maintained by the club, with proceeds
funding club activities. In this way, a
i simple IGA:
" contributes to improved nutritional
status and income at household level
• supports ongoing club activities and
• raises the profile and status of the
club and club members within the
community.
-Approachable, free and accessible VeT services
The launch of the Youth-Friendly mobile voluntary
counselling and testing centres (VCTs) immensely
boosts DSW's advocacy for young people's sexual and
reproductive health. Working with public and private
health organizations. DSW will provide youth friendly,
approachable, free and accessible VeT services with the
trucks covering set circuits in the districts where the
programme will be implemented.
DSW has established an operational working
partnership with National AIDS and STDs Control
Programme (NASCOPj, district health service providers/
stakeholders, youth networks in Coast, Western,
Nyanza, Eastern and Nairobi regions where the
programme will be implemented.
Through the mobile VCT, the organization intends
to establish an extensive community-based referral
network and home-based care {HBC} support system.
Young people who visit the mobile VCTs and who need
to obtain other services will be referred to institutions
that can offer them the kind of services they needed.
Those living with HIV/AIDS will be helped to access
home-based care.
Through training, DSW hopes to enhance awareness,
knowledge and skills about HIV/Aids and VCT among
youth, community members. leaders and service
providers in the project areas.
DSW would like to ensure high quality youth
friendly services including veTs are delivered through
strengthening the capacity of relevant actors and
quality assurance systems at the natioriallevel and in
the targeted districts.
At the end of the project. the organization plans to
document and the experiences and lessons learnt from
the project to be shared widely with stakeholders.
Why focus on Kenya?
Kenya is home to approximately 34.7 million people,
43 per cent of whom are under 15 years of age. Sexual
activity among adolescents is high. Factors such as
biological, social and economic hardships, urbanisation,
schooling and weakening traditional structures have a
negative impact on young people's sexual behaviour.
As a result, young people in Kenya face a host of
threats to their sexual and reproductive health. What is
needed are comprehensive health programmes aimed
at decreasing the risk of early and unwanted pregnancy,
unsafe abortion and sexually transmitted infections
including HIV/AIDS.
Where it all began
DSW Kenya is a non-governmental organisation
committed to addressing young people's sexual and
reproductive health needs throughout the country.
Youth-to-Youth (Y2Y) - a comprehensive programme
designed to improve the sexual and reproductive health
of young people by young people - is at the heart of all
activities.
DSW Kenya also provides capacity-building for a
wide range of civ.iI society organi~ationsand promotes
advocacy for sexual and reproductive health, as well as
networking and collaboration amongst key players in
population and development.
Incidentally, Kenya is where it all began. DSW
launched its first family planning project in 1992.
DSW's presence in Kenya was strengthened with
the establishment of its country office in May 2000.
Alongside the main office in Nairobi. the Kenyan
country programme is also run by three regional
offices, located in Eastern, Western and Coast Province,
respectively.
The Y2Y programme
The Y2Y programme in Kenya spans five regions,
namely Western, Nairobi/Central, Nyanza. Rift Valley
and Coastal Province, and is implemented by OSW in
co-opera~tion with over a dozen partner organisations.
The country~wideyouth club network has
continuously grown and currently comprises more than
170 active clubs, which have contributed significantly
to improving young Kenyan's sexual and reproductive
health, self-esteem and social participation.
Emphasis is laid on the most vulnerable populations.
Through the so-called "KQMA" network, DSW reaches
out to young people living in the Korogocho and
Mathare slums of Nairobi, 85 per cent of which are
sexually active, but lack access to contraceptives and
sexual and reproductive health education and services.
The concept of youth-friendly mobile voluntary
counselling and testing (VCT) services forms a new
pillar of the Y2Y programme in Kenya.
Early diagnosis is key to averting HIV, sothis new
component of OSW's work is a valuable addition. With
this service, DSW is enabled to provide mobile VCT and
increase overall access to HIV/AIDS prevention and
home-based care for young people.
Strengthening civil society
Developments related to the implementation of
the Millennium Development Goals, the Paris Aid
Declaration etc. mean that the Kenyan government
is increasingly in charge of poverty reduction efforts
and development assistance priorities, including the
Poverty Reduction Strategies Papers and the European
Union's Country Strategies Papers. Consequently.
strengthening Kenyan civil society participation in
the development of these strategies is of paramount
importance. DSW's advocacy activities in Kenya
therefore aim to strengthen the capacity of civil
society organisations to campaign around sexual and
reproductive health. Additionally, DSW's efforts are
designed to establish and nurture relationships with key
regional policy and deds·lon~makers.
For further information Contact:
DSW Kenya Country Office
Tel: 020 3870448/2731398
Fax: 020 3877212
email: dswkenya.org
info@dsw-hannover.de
i www.dsw-online.de