DAILY NATION Thursday July 19, 2007

FUNDING
By MWANIKI WAHOME

KENYA GETS 5B FOR THE WAR ON AIDS

But World bank says the use of funds by the government needs to be speeded up.
Kenya yesterday received a credit line of $80 million (5.36 billion) 
for its HIV and AIDS programmes from the World Bank.The funds for Total 
War Against HIV and Aids project will be used to expand
the coverage of interirentiops to prevent
and mitigate the impact of the disease.
Speaking duringthe exchange ofsigned
documents on the project at the 'Iteasury
building, Finance minister, Amos Kimunya
saJ'd the-",edit brings to $370 million
(Sh24.8 billion) the total funding from the
World Bank for various projects in 2007.
"This demonstrates continued engagement"
with the bank; contrary to some reports
that the Government was not keen
of funding from the World Bank" he said.
He said that the country needed more resources
from the bank to address poverty
issues, and in development of thetnfrastructure.
However;he noted thatthe low absorption
of the funds needed to be addressed
to speed up implementation of development
projects.
The non-governmental organisations
and community-based organisations received
the last tranche of aid for the fight
againstHNandAids in 2005, through the
Kenya HN and Aids Disaster Response
But World Bank says
use offunds by the
Government needs
to be speeded up
Kenya gets·ShSbn.
tOJ!,war onAids
project The project was saddled by complaints
over lack of transparency on use
of the funds by some non-governmental
organisations.
,M!' Kimunya said that the Government
had increased the funding fur hea.1thto
Sh34.4 billion in this year's budget.
World -Bank country director, Colin
Bruce said the National Aids and Control
Council should continue strengthening
the management of the funds.
"The Thtal War Against HN and Aids
project will enablethe National Aids and
Control Council to provide grants for result-
focused activities byNGOs, andthese
will be subject to rigorous and transpar-.
ent processes ofseI~ctionJlllonitoringand
community oversight;' MrBroce'said.
He said the World Bank was working
with the Government to accelerate implementation
of projects.
"This, is critical for further improving
development results, for Kenyans, esPt:-'-
cially the poor. . - ",,:
Its also crucial for priming the econ.... •
my for higher growth in line with the re-' '
sent budget and vision for transforming'
Keny~ into a middle income economy by
2030;' he said. "
Special Projects minister, Jobn'jM ,
said some NGOs that had not dem . >' I
strated prudent use offunds in the earlier '
project would not be given the funds.,

