DAILY NATION Thursday June 7, 2007

EC project to help the vulnerable cope with HIV/AIDS

The HIV/AIDS project targeting those most at
risk from and affected by the disease is expected
to improve their lives in many ways. It will help
them to better tackle or cope with the HIV/AlDS
challenge.
Those targeted by the project will be provided
with free subsidized HN/AIDS services.
They will also get comprehensive access to HIV/
AIDS prevention, care and treatment:
It is expected that the target groups will
be empowered through raised awareness and
sustained, positive behaviour change.
The project, funded by the EC ~ European
Commission ~ , will also provide improved quality
of sexual and reproductive health (SRH) and HIVj
AIDS services.
The Ministry of Health, especially at the district
level, will gain managerially and technically by
having their capacity built to provide better quality
SRH and HIV/AlDS services to local beneficiaries.
Poor and vulnerable women and men of
reproductive age shall benefit by some being
identified and selected to be community~basedhealth
workers (CBHWs) and youth peer educators (YFEs) on
the project, which will not only increase their levels of
understanding of SRH and HN/AIDS, but also decrease
their families' susceptibility to the disease.
It will also provide them with some income which win
raise their standards of living and lift their households
out of poverty.
The public and private health providers, non~
governmental organizations (NGOs) and community~
based organizations (CBOs) that are part of the HN/AIDS
PPP (Public·private partnership) referral network will
benefit from regular exchanges of information, lessons
learned and best practice.
In addition, they will benefit from a complementary
and harroonised approach to providing SRH and
HlY/AIDS services, whereby each member will not be
competing with other providers for beneficiaries and
clients to use their services.
This will increase efficiency and focus on serving the
needs and demands of the target groups.
CBHWs and YFEs will be trained in SRH and HIV/
AIDS awareness and knowledge which they will use when
visiting communities and special target groups, such as
women's associations and out-of-school youth groups.
CBHWs and YFEs will also benefit from learning how
to use information, education and communication (IEC)
and behaviour change communication (BCC) materials
to support their work and how to organise and conduct
participatory awareness raising sessions on HN/AIDS.
This will be important in facilitating increased
awareness and positive behaviour change among the
beneficiary groups, as well as mobilizing clients to access
SRH and HIV/AIDS services.
Community leaders will benefit from enhanced
understanding of SRH and HIV/AIDS, allowing them to
be of greater positive influence within their community.
Young people will gain from the project by some of
them being selected to work as YFEs to support the IEC
and BCC activities, which will decrease their vulnerability
to poor sexual and reproductive health or infection
Hly/AIDS.