SATURDAY NATION June 9, 2007

Kenyans bury their heads in the sand
Despite law against
abortion and outrage
by religious leaders
and moralists, lots
ofwomen continue
to risk their lives
to end unwanted
pregnancies, writes

BY MILDRED NGESA

Every day, Wardill of Kenyatta National
Hospital receives between
six and eight cases of botched
abortions.
In a month, the ward deals with an
average of 250 cases of failed abortions
involving women who are rushed to the
hospital after attempts to end pregnancies
backfire.
The national statistics are more startling.
About 316,560 abortions occur in the
country annually. Out of these, an esti~
mated 20,893 women are hospitalised
with abortion-related complications.
Despite general outrage over the practice,
thousands of women in the country
still risk their lives to end unplanned or
unwanted pregnancies.
According to a recent report by Ipas,
an international reproductive health organisation
working in conjunction with
the Ministry of Health, Kenya Medical
Association and Fida-Kenya, abortion is
increasingly becoming a major challenge
to the provision of reproductive health
services.
Religious leaders
Although religions leaders and moralists
have condemned the act, it continues with
hnpunity.
"It is a problem that cannot be wished
away. No matterhow much public outcry
there is against abortion, the fact is that
manywomen continue procuring it in the
backstreets andwe areleftto clean-up the
mess of quacks which most of the time
maybe too late;' says ProfJoseph Karanja,
an obstetrician gynaecologistandlecturer
at the University ofNalrobi.
Prof Karanja asks Kenyans to stop burying
their heads in the sand and squarely
face the preval!iug "abortion crisis~
''We should deal with the issue of abortion
the same way we are dealing with
HIV/Aids.
Necessarymechanisms
''In the beginningAids was highly stigmatised.
But now people are talking about
it opeuly and the necessary mechanisms
have been put in place.
''We have seen a change.Whythen can't
we rise above the stigma on abortion in
the same way?" asked the lecturer.
'~ortion affects all in society includeng
the rich, poor, educated, youug, old
and even the clergy. We should have a
sober approach on this issue:'
RecentlY, Health assistant minister
Enoch Kibunguchy, himself a gynaecologist,
declared having safely procured abortions
and called for sanity in the abortion
debate.
"I told a forum of gynaecologists in
Nyeri recently that as a doctor, I have
performed abortions and so have manyof
the doctors in attendance. I said 'may the
first innocent doctor who has not done it
castthe first stone' and they concurredbecanse
they understandhow desperate the
situation is. It is time that we looked at
abortion soberly;' sald Dr Kibungnchy.
The high cost of contraceptives and
poor access fuelled by religious leaders'
condemnation of their use, has left many
sexually-active women in a dilemma on
howto deal with unwanted pregnancies.
More children
Contrary to popular beliefthat it is mainly
youug school-going girls who procure
abortion, statistics reveal that older
women - including mamed ones - often
find themselves with unplanned pregnancies
and engage in the practice.
They include those whose husbands
no longer need more children and older
women presumably past child-bearing
age who could "embarrass" their families
with a pregnancies.
Mothers in rural areas who cannot access
or afford contraception find themselves
in the Same dilemma.
In Kenya, abortion is legally restricted
to cases where a woman's life is considered
to be in danger due to pregnancy.
The law criminalises anybody who
procures an abortion in unsafe circumstances.
However, under the Health ministry,
the law allows post-abortion care services
for women who have developed complications
while trying to tenninate a pregnancy.
Studies conducted in various district
hospitals in the country reveal increasing
desperation amongwomenwho often use
crude tools to procure abortions.
Some cases result in the removal of
uteruses, blockage of fallopian tubes or
severe haemorrhage, and death.
''When awomanis desperate to procure
an abortion, she will not care about the
qualifications of the personwho offers to
perlorm it or even consider the fact that
she might lose her life in the process.
''That is how desperate women are in
this situation;' says Dr Solomon Orero, a
gynaecologist based in Southern Sudan.
According to a 2006 survey on unsafe
abortions bythe Population Reference Bureau,
an estimated 46 million abortions
are performed yearly worldwide
Ofthese, 19 million are procured in unsafe
conditions by people who lack the
necessary skills.
Developingworld
The report also states that 529,000 girls
and women die from pregnancy-related
complications each year, almost all of
them in the developing world.
About 68,000 ofthese deaths are due to
unsafe abortions.
But even more critical is the need for
accessibility and aVailability of reproductive
health services such as contraceptives
to prevent unplanned pregnancies.
The Health ministry has also not come
up a comprehensive reproductive health
budget.
"The reproductive health budget has
been decimally low. More efforts need to
be put in this area if we are to save our
women;' said Dr Kibunguchy.
The Global Gag Rule by the US on organisations
that fund reproductive health
projects has worsened the situation. Ithas
led to closure ofhundreds ofreproductive
health clinics across Africa.
