SUNDAY NATION July 8, 2007

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 2
people using prostitution to earn a livelihood.
This is what I feel should be addressed first. The
rich, for instance, are able to afford anti~retrovirals,
and even can protect themselves better;'
said Michael.
He is an HIV activist, and a member ofa community
programme in Kenya that uses puppetry
and folk media to pass on HIVmessages. Clad
in a red T-shirt, his anticipation was clear, as
the team went on with the scripting and shooting
process..
The programme was spread for three days
from Toesday.
''We had selected some locations in Nairobi
where theywould do the filming;' saidMrMntahi.
The contestants had from 4 pm to midnight,
to come up with the idea and write a script. On
Wednesday, they had 9 am to 6 pm to do the
shooting, while Thursday was the day to do the
editing from 9 am to 4 pm at the Hilton hotel.
There were no second chances for those who
had made mistakes.
Eyes ofjudges
The films were taken through the eyes of a
judge's bench consisting of Bryan Barber, an
influential music video and motion picture director,
and two young ladies - Sotie Dilmitris, a
YWCAmemberfrom Zimbabwe, and a Kenyan,
Mhoone Umbina, 23, who is also HIVpositive.
"The best film is one that has an emotional
resonance. The simpler the idea the better it is;
we were looking at a film that can be Understood
by young people ail over the world, so the contestants
had to be careful about the language
they use and avoid phrases just centralised in
their countries;' MTV's Ms Arnold said.
The best film was announced at an intimate
film screening and awards ceremonyheld atthe
Hilton hotel on Thursday night. The competition
was being held in Africa for the first lime.
48fest Kenya came on the heels of last year's
successful 48fest which took place in Toronto,
Canada, in conjunction with the XVIlnternational
Aids Comerence (Aids 2006). Fear and
Loathing, a three-minute film about stigma,
won in the Best Film category. The winning
team comprised delegates from Bulgaria, Canada,
China, Guyana, India, and Uganda.
In addition, all eight films from 48fest won
awards at the NewYorkAids Film Festival, and
one film, The liMt Time, was a finalist at the
prestigious NewYork Film Festival.
Most vulnerable
"We target women because they are the most
vulnerable in contracting HIv,' saidMsArnold.
She said the MTV programme reaches 90 per
cent of the top 50 HIV impacted countries in
the world.
'~ short films as well as a documentary of
the challenge will be available for broadcast
in December for World Aids Day acress all of
MTV's worldwide platfOlnlS - on air, online, and
on mobile - as well as to third party broadcasters
and content distributors rights- and costfree;'
said Ms Arnold.
Launched in1998, StayingAlive is a multimedia
global HIV and Aids prevention campaign
that chailenges stigma and discrimination. The
Emmy award-'Winning campaign consists of
documentaries, public service announcements,
youth forums and Web content.
48fest Kenya is a partnership between MTV
Networks International, UNAids, the M-A-C
Aids Fund, The David and Lucile Packard Foundation
and UNFPA
The competition will be held in Mexico next
year.
