SUNDAY NATION February 8, 2009

CUSTOMS

WIDOWS SAY NO TO INHERITANCE

They prefer to struggle
and feed their children
rather than be inherited
and helped by in-laws
By PATRICK MAYOYO
As she prepared the mixture of
maize and beans to feed her
children, Elsa Atieno did not
know where their next meal
would come from. Since her husband’s
death, she has not been able to work her
farm and getting food for her children has
been difficult.
Things would have been different had
she agreed to be cleansed and inherited.
But because she refused to follow custom,
she has been treated as n outcast by her
late husband’s relatives and neighbours.
And because of this they have barred
her from tilling his land or repairing her
grass-thatched house. Tradition decrees
that a widow cannot return to farming
until she has been inherited. The ban also
applies to house repairs and building a
new house.
Remained defiant
But Mrs Atieno and 120 other widows
from Kakayeta Malela village in Homa
Bay District remain defiant. The women,
who have formed the Kanyamwa Aids
Support Group, are questioning the wisdom
of retaining customs like widowcleansing
and wife inheritance, which
are counterproductive in the campaign
against HIV/Aids.
“Our husbands died of Aids, and some
of us have been confirmed to be HIVpositive.
So we are taken aback when
our brothers-in-law and other people
start pestering us to be cleansed or inherited,”
said Mrs Atieno, who is the group’s
Above: Some
members of the
Kanyamwa Aids
Support Group at
a meeting. Below:
Their spokesperson,
Mrs Elsa
Atieno. Photos/
JACOB OWITI
prevalence among uncircumcised men
is three times higher than among the circumcised.
The Ndhiwa widows now target cleansers
– their main tormentors – who are
blamed for the spread of the killer disease
because of engaging in unprotected sex.
They are nen who are supposed to sleep
with widows after the burial of their husbands.
“Since we declined to be inherited we
are being treated as outcasts, Mrs Atieno
said. “But we are now reaching out to
those who loathe us and educating them
about HIV/Aids.”
Julius Juma, a former cleanser or jakowiny,
has joined the group to convince
cleansers to use condoms to protect
themselves and their spouses. Mrs Roselyn
Ochupe, the chairperson of the group,
said their defiance has made their lives
difficult, but they vow not to give in to the
custom they say endangers their lives.
spokesperson. Luo custom requires that
a widow undergo chodo kode, a cleansing
rite which involves sleeping with another
man before resuming her normal life, or
even being inherited or supported by her
husband’s relatives.
But this practice has been opposed by
health workers, social workers and human
rights activists because of the potential
risk of spreading the deadly HIV virus.
The Kanyamwa Aids Support Group
in Ndhiwa Division has not only rebelled
against the traditional practice but also
wants to enlighten people about the dangers
of HIV/Aids. According to the 2007
Kenya Aids Indicator Survey, Nyanza
Province leads the country in Aids prevalence
with a 15.3 per cent infection rate.
The report estimates that 1.4 million
adults in Kenya are infected with HIV,
and Nyanza and Rift Valley account for
more than half this number.
The survey also shows that the HIV