Tuesday February 24, 2009 DAILY NATION

RESEARCH
Hopes raised for Aids cure

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 1

Kenya’s is million people infected with
11W 240.000 of who depend on a strict
regimen of anti-retrovinal drugs.
The development comes at a tUne when
local researchers at the University ofNai
mbi, collaborating with international eci
entists. have intensified their efforts to
find the gene that protects stme Kenyan
prostitutes from 111V inftctions despite
repeated expcsure to the virus
The government is considering with
drawing several brands of anti-retrovinil
medicine that have been found to have
severe side-effects, especially on women.
according to the director of’the National
Aids/ STDs Control Pm’amme(Nascop),
Dr Nicholas Muraguri
The cured patient, a man, was treated
almcst two years ago and now has no 111V
In his body, according to the head of the
pitient medical team, Gerollütter of the
Chante University of Medicine in Berlin.
Defective nes
However, scientists say the procedure
used on the man is difficult to repeat on
other patients.
They have since mctlified the delivery
method througta relatively newtechnof
ogy called gene therapy — used to correct
defective genes responsible for disease.
Now a private firm, Sangamo Bio
sciences of Richmond, California. has
begun human trials of the promising
gene therapyi The group maltes artificial
versions of natural enzymes. which zero
in on anddisruptanygenesselccted— in
this case. the gene that helps the develop
ment of 111V
According to the Neic Scie ntiAat report,
SanmopLans to take blood samples
from 1211W patients and extract the CD4
cells. In a complex proc the vins will
be washed off the cells. The genetically
modified cens will then be injected back
into the patient,
Researchers estimate that the pitients
would still have many (1)4 cens infected
with MIV in their body, but because the
engineered cells will be resistant to the
virus, they could replicate 6ster and live
longer than the others, eventually becom
ing the dominam CD4 cells Rarchers
say they have seen that result when the
treatment was administered to mice.
Another study by the University of
California, Los Angeles. and appearing
last week in the journal Nature Medi
cine. showed similar promising results
in treating 111V patIents through gene
therapy.
The treatment involved giving patients
modified blood stem oeils designed to
stop 11W reproducing by targeting two
key proteins Seventy-four patients in
the trial either received the therapy, or
a placebo.
After 48 weel, the researchers found
that there was no statistically significant
dirence in the amoum oflllVcistulat
12
Nuniberof 111V .ifected people to be
used in a trial for new thery
Ing in the blood of the two groupt of pa
tients.
However, after ioo weeks, the patients
who received the therapy had higher lev
els of CD4. cells — the key oeils of the
immune system that are specifically de
stroyed by 111V.
Lead researcher, Professor Ronald Mit
suyasu, said the study lends a’edence to
the concept that inserting and adminis
teringa single anti-HI Vgene ina patlent
own bloodstemceLlsandgivingit backto
them could reduce viral replication well
enough to replace the need for a llfttiine
ofantiretroviral thera
The therapy comes at a time when glo
bal research on 11W vaccines and micro
bicide studies have shown poor results
including an undertaking between the
universities ofNairobi and Oxford, which
was shelved in 2006.
However since last year. researchers
from the universities of Nairobi and Manitoba
in Canada have opened up new centres
in Korogocho and Kangemi to study
more prostitutes.
The research will go on until 2010 and
is expected to shed more light on why they
are resistant to HIV infection.
The women being recruited now are
HIV negative prostitutes, who will then
be studied for a period of three years to
monitor their responses to HIV.