Daily Nation/ Wednesday, September 25, 2002


HEALTH Subsidised treatment to begin soon

CONTINUED FROM PAGE I

He said drugs to prevent mother-to-child infection as well as post-
exposure prophylaxis for rape victims and health workers getting cut


while treating patients, would be

imported.

"These drugs are not currently available but have been included on the essential drugs list," Dr. Shariff said.

"This is going to be an affordable treatment for HIV AIDS patients and it should start by the end of the year," he said.
Coast Province is seriously affected by the pandemic and many
people have succumbed to the disease. Patients with the disease pay about high cost of treatment. Sh2,370 per month. Meanwhile, the 56th annual general assembly of the National Council
of Churches of Kenya (NCCK)
resolved to encourage its members
to develop policies that take into

consideration the needs of people

infected or affected by Aids.


The     umbrella     protestant

churches body also said at its

recent conference at the Kanamai

centre that the poverty levels

afflicting    Kenyans     must be

addressed as part of efforts to

fight the disease.

Conservative estimates indicate

that more than 15 million people

are living below the poverty line

while more children continue to

drop out of school because of hun-

ger.

Said Rev Mutava Musyimi,

NCCK secretary-general: "Many

of our people are desperate for

relief food. Many have no access

to education, clean water, health

facilities and other basic necessi-
ties."
In his article appearing in "The

NCCK     Report     and       Strategic

Plan", Kilifi district medical

officer of health, Dr Samuel Were,

pleads with the church leaders to

"break their silence" and forge a


united front in the fight against

HIV/Aids.

According to him the church

should target the high-risk groups


such as truck drivers, commercial

sex workers, intravenous drug


users and homeless youths with

positive information on the dis-


ease.

Thr~ugh th,e use of voluntary


counselling and test sites estab-


lished from a Sh50 million credit


given by he World Bank in 1999,


the youths can get first-hand infor-

mation from their peers who man-


age the centres.

This, it is hoped, will increase

from the current 10 per cent to 13
per cent the number of Kenyans
who know their HIV ,status. This
figure is, however, not satisfactory
to the government officers strug-
gling to fight the scourge.
The last Budget set aside Sh300
million to establish centres in Kis-
umu, Nakuru, Mombasa, Embu,
Kakamega, Garissa and Nyerialso
not only create awareness but to

install facilities to be used in test-


ing and counselling.

In Kenya, combination therapy

costs around Sh7,000 a month

which is beyond many people who

wallow in poverty.

This is where the role of the

church in the prevention of HIV

infection and care of the infected

and affected comes in because of

its influence on society.

The church has a powerful voice

with its own structures and sys-

tems that can enable it to reach

the common man in a persuasive

way.

With HIV/Aids affecting Chris-

tians, Muslims and pagans alike,

the church cannot isolate itself in

the fight.
