9th October 2002

Jailed for two years over an
untruthful Aids accusation

CONTINUED    FROM PAGE 1
could not be attended to. Instead, we were referred
to the Moi Teaching and Referral Hospital.
It was there that the man's eight-year-old san
was tested for the human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV) and found to be positive.
I was put in a vehicle and driven to the Eldaret
Police Station, then booked into a cell. All this
time, I thought it was a bad dream and that I would
wake up in the safety and familiar surroundings of
home. Being booked in the cell had a sobering
effect on me. I realised that something was terribly
wrong. That was when I started crying. My mind
ran wild as I imagined what I would be subjected
to. I had heard abaut the cruelty that the police
mete out to peaple held in cells. One could even be
jailed for a crime one had not committed.
I stayed in the cells overnight. The following
day, some police officers started questioning me. I
tried to. answer their questions as fully as possible.
Each day, hawever, far the follawing two weeks,
they kept grilling me even as I pleaded my inno-
cence on all their accusations. Some seemed to
believe me but after some time, they must have
decided that I should be taken to court.
"Phyllis Khavenza. You are charged that on
September 20, 20()O, at Shauri Yako Estate of
Eldoret in Uasin Gishu District, you indecently
assaulted an under-age boy, causing him actual
bodily harm, contrary to Section 164 of the Penal
Code, and infected him with HIV/Aids."

Ice needles
I felt my blood turn into      a million needles of ice.
Still, I found vaice to deny    what the prasecutar was
saying. When I was asked        if the charge was true, I
flatly denied it.
I felt confused and was    ashamed   to look peaple
in the eye. The courtraom was jammed. I felt very
bitter. I was informed that I could be given a
Sh50,OOO bond but I could not raise such an
amount of maney. Neither could my newly-
widowed mother.
So off to. remand prisan 1 went.
I was taken to the OK Prison in Eldoret, where I
spent close to two years. It was here that I alsb had
my son seven months later. I named him Meshack,
after my father. I gave birth at the Moi Teaching
and Referral Haspital. It was a normal birth, with-
out any camplications. It was trying caring for a

baby in prison. All that I had to give him was par~
ridge, and sometimes milk, in small quantities, sup-
plied by sympathetic female prison wardens.
I used to stay with my son the whole day in the
prisan compound. I never went out to work. The
living conditians were unhealthy, and I often fell
ill. Every time I remembered         that I had been
wrongfully accused I wept. I felt relieved after
shedding tears. Initially, the women wardens used
to beat me, but they later started empathising with

me as the case continued to be heard. They started

telling me they were remorseful for what had hap-

pened and prayed that the case ended in my
favour.

The boy had testified that he had gane to. the

estate to visit a friend when he met me. That I had
told him I wanted to send him with money to

somebody. It was all lies. I knew the boy very well
because he 'was my younger' brather's playmate.
Beyond that, it was all conjecture.

He claimed that I had led him to my house, shut
the door and forced him onto my bed.
His face was calm as he told the caurt in a plain-
. tive voice: 'She taok aff my short trausers and
started touching my private parts. She then took
off her pants and shirt, held me and placed me on
the bed. She then farced me to. have sex with her.'
I felt so ashamed, knawing that people believed
the bay more. He never looked me in the eye and I
knew he was afraid af his father.

e had told the court that he started bleeding
H        in his private parts after we allegedly had
sex and that when he gat hame, he informed
his father.

The examination       at the Moi Teaching and
Referral Hospital had established that the boy was
HIV positive, that his private parts were swollen
and that he had genital wounds.
But the prosecution had nat examined me to
establish whether I was also HIV pasitive.
Initially the boy's father used to come to court
but he just disappeared. He is a small-scale trader
at the Eldoret West market. Even naw he is not
seen at his house.
I had not spoken to a lawyer, but I kept asking

myself: "How came I am being accused of infecting
PHYLLIS KHAVENZA: "I thought I was going to jail for a
the boy with Aids?"
When my turn to give evidence came, I asked the
magistrate why the boy's father was nat testifying.
Why was I still strong and healthy two years after I
had been accused of having Aids, yet I did nat feed
well? Why was my son, wham I delivered in prisan,
healthy and yet he was only fed on parridge and an
occasional measure af milk given to me by empa-

thising female warders?

It was then that the prosecutor asked that I be

tested for HIV. The results af that August I test
were negative. Then I wanted to know why I was

HIV-negative when I was being accused of inlect-

ing the boy. I was tested again, and the results were

still negative.
Although a repart from the Mai Teaching and
Referral Hospital found the boy to ·be HIV-

pasitive, with swollen sexual organs and genital
waunds, I was HIV negative and did not have any
genital wounds. The report ruled aut the possibility
of my having been treated in prison remand since
the process was technical and difficult, and not
available at the prisons health facility.
This new evidence forced the magistrate to set
September 19 as the date of the ruling, but it was
brought farward by two days.
On September 17, at 6 pm, I was brought befare
Senior Principal Magistrate Lucy Gitari. I felt very
apprehensive.     I did not know why I had been
brought to caurt two days early. I thaught I was
going to jail for a crime I did not cammit.
The margistrate started by nating that the boy's

father did not testify to. corrabarate       evidence
tauching him. He had also declined to. sign a palice
bond as a court witness.
But more importantly, she nated that the prose-
cutian had failed to examine me to establish if I was
also HIV pasitive. It anly applied far the test to be
done after I painted this out.

No sexual contact
The prosecution, she said, had failed to prove that

any sexual contact taok place between myself and
the boy. Since the complainant was of a tender age,
she said. his evidence needed to be corroborated.
I felt relief wash all over my tired body when I
heard the magistrate say: "The complainant must
have mistakenly implicated her. I find her not guilty
and acquit her.'
I felt happy that the magistrate made the right
decision but at the same time, I felt bitter that I h

to suffer for wrongs I had not committed, all

because   of turning down this man's sexual

advances.


I was innocent


As I watched the prasecutar, Chief Inspector Oba-
diah Magatti, gather his papers, I felt very bitter
that I had been made to stay in prison for two dren s

years, have my child in jail, when I was innacent.
There was nobady in court when I was released
at 6 pm. I walked home. penniless. Mum was sur- churc
prised to. See me enter the house as the darkness set
in. She had planned to come to court an September
19 for the judgment. When she learnt that I had
been freed. she was so overjoyed that we sat up late
into. the night talking about the whole ordeal.
I was told in court that I could take legal actian
but I am poor. We live in a single-room house with •
my unemployed mother and four other children. I unpro
cannot institute legal action within the 14 days af e
the judgment date.
I would like to. appeal to human rights organisa-
tions and the International Federation of Women
Lawyers [Fida] to assist me sue for compensatian

for wrongful confinement.
I think the bay's father should also be arrested
for giving false information to. the polic
Whatever is done to. right past wrongs, I know SaY
that I will always live with this stigma, which I hav
lived with since I was arrested when I was 17. I feel
tarmented but now, at least my name has been ment wit
cleared and I am relieved.
My son's father went to. seek employment in Nai- r
robi soonafter I was remanded.,        "


wednesday@nation.co.ke
