Daily Nation/ July 17, 2002

Woman's second chance at life
You could not see her ears. Most of her body was covered

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 1

Josephine's illness, the village expert decreed,
had to be a result of her cooking with taboo fire-
wood harvested from a tree struck by lightning. The
rumble of thunder and the crack of lightning enjoys
deified reverence among the Marachi, as it does
among almost all the communities living in western
Kenya.
Herbal baths were prescribed and administered
#NAME?
Hidden away
As her condition deteriorated, Josephine gradually
lost appetite for food. Although her mother nursed
her lovingly, she had to split her time between car-
ing for her and attending to other chores. She, too,
bad given up on her daughter.
With time, their daughter became a secret, hid-
den away in the hut the family used for a kitchen,
the door chained to its post, to keep the smell from
her sores from fouling the air in the compound.
Caring for their youngest child strained the rela-
tionship between Odera and Imali no end.
It was Imali, though, who looked elsewhere for
other solutions, considering that the herbs were
not helping much. "A man who goes to the same
church with us came and told us that the treatment
we were giving Josephine was not effective," she
says. Instead, their daughter was baptised and the
rest left to Providence. In Butula, the church is a
kpiritual place, but membership also ensures one a
decent and even colourful burial. A dignified
ending.
Then a neighbour who has publicly declared that
she is HIV positive visited. Josephine's wounds
were an unspeakable sight. Poor hygiene and lack
of proper treatment had given the warts time and
opportunity to fester into deep sores that housed
maggots. She suggested that Josephine be taken to
hospital, but with the sores on her body, transpor-
tation would present a problem.
Motorised transport is rare to the point of being
non-existent in Butula. So if someone falls ill, they

are sat in a wooden cane chair, strapped onto a
bicycle carrier and wheeled slowly and gently to

the hospital. It could take an hour, perhaps more,
depending on how sore the patient is.

he thought of taking Josephine to hospital
the hopelessness of his daughter's case. He
T      frightened Odera no end. He thought about
thought about the inevitable end, and then he
thought about the expense of having to hire a vehi-
cle to bring her body back. It was unbearable. It
was cheaper to wait and feed the mourners ...
Even as Josephine's parents accepted what fate
had dealt them and their youngest daughter, neigh-
bours who had seen the sores wrought on her body
suspected that it was a problem the local Aids
organisation could help with. In Butula, it is not
uncommon for people to disclose their positive
HIV status, and those who succumb to Aids and
Andrew Muli                 I Parenthood
Helping children who suck their thumbs

ary Mukami had tried everything she
M            knew to get her daughter to stop
sucking her thumb.
"I punished her but that was not

enough," says the mother of two. "I then tied the

hand she sucks to her bed. But I found out that

she woke up in the middle of the night and

sucked the thumb."

Another parent, Wambua, rubbed pepper onto

her son's thumb, hoping that this would deter him

from putting it in his mouth. It did not work. The

boy licked the pepper off, and then went ahead to

suck the thumb.

"I tried dressing the thumb with a band-aid,

but he removed it and continued to suck. He
continued with the habit until he married," says

Wambua.
Thumb sucking is a common trait among chil-
dren. The young of monkeys and chimpanzees
suck their thumbs, too, while elephant calves suck
their trunks. Sucking of thumb, finger or trunk
has a soothing effect on the sucker. All children
suck their thumbs at one time or another in their
lives, but most give up the habit as they grow. But
die are not eulogised with ambiguous illnesses.
When Imali returned from her midwifery duties

on day, she found community workers from the
Rural Education and Empowerment Programmeat

her home demanding that Josephine be released
and taken to hospital at once. And so Josephine
made the seemingly impossible journey - on a
bicycle carrier - and thus began a process of
"You could not see her ears. Most of her body
healing.
was covered in wounds and scabs," says Mary
Makokha, the REEP coordinator. The nurses at the
mission hospital washed Josephine's wounds in
antiseptic and started her on antibiotic treatment.
As luck would have it, there was no funeral.
Although there are still pock marks on Josephine's
face and body, the wounds are all gone, except for
the ones on her knees. She was bed-ridden for a
long time, and so cannot move. But there is hope.
Maybe in another month, she will go to the Busia
District Hospital for physiotherapy. Perhaps then,




there are some people, like Wambua's son, who
suck their thumbs all the way into adulthood.
It is common for parents to try to stop thumb-
sucking by insisting that the child discontinue the

habit, often under threat of some form of punish-

ment. If such an ultimatum is given without an
alternative, though, the child is unlikely to give it

up. Parents need to give concrete reasons for


their disapproval of the habit. When a child sucks

his thumb, for instance, his hands are often dirty,

which could result in his contracting diseases like

typhoid, diarrheoa, tuberculosis, pneumonia or

worms. It should be remembered, though, that

the urge to suck the thumb is so great that
hygiene is irrelevant to the child.


Delicate skin
Apart from diseases, the texture of the sucked
finger or thumb is weakened to some extent. Just
below the nail of the thumb or finger, is the invis-
ible part of the nail. Though quite strong, it can
be ruined by sucking.
Children spend an incredible amount of time
preoccupied with thumb sucking. The child is
she will be able to move again.
"I want to walk again," says Josephine, her voice

strong and emotional. There is little fear of death in
her thoughts. Her parents no longer look at her as a

dying person. They have been counselled on giving
care to their daughter from home.
"Now, she is okay. She will walk again," her
father says hopefully.
Negative result

For her part, Imali has learnt a thing or two about
HIV. First, she took an HIV test because she had
been caring for her daughter and feared thai she
might have been infected. So far, she has a negative
result and will take another test in three months.
"I had to take the test to be certain that I was
okay. I wanted to be sure that caring for my daugh-
ter was not putting the women I attend to in danger
of infection."
"Since Josephine was tested, we have accepted
her condition and are ready to care for her," says




likely to be absent-minded and idle, even skip-
ping duties in order to suck the thumb.
Thumb sucking can lead to feelings of guilt and

low self-esteem arising from negative comments
made by people. Children will go as far as isolat-

ing themselves from others for fear of being made

fun of. A teenager will suck his thumb in secret to

avoid being seen and ridiculed.

An informal study carried out over a period of

30 years on a subject, Dan, yielded a number of

interesting results.

Dan was found to have a 'heavy tongue' - he

had difficulty pronouncing the sounds's' and 'z'.

For
instance, he would read 'Salsa' as 'Thaltha' and

'zero' as 'thero'. It appeared that the constant
movement and folding of the tongue as he sucked
his thumb affected his pronunciation. When Dan
eventually stopped sucking his thumb, his pro-
nounciation improved.
While thumb-sucking can be a long-term prob-
lem, it is always possible to stop it in childhood.
From Dan's experience the following suggestions
were made for handling this problem:
Imali. "Even if you do not have symptoms, it is

important to go for testing. You never know," a

wizened Imali as she cares for her daughter, Imali
Eyery day, says.

thinks about how her family has triumphed over
Aids, even if temporarily. Aids, when it touches the
family, is not some terrifying thing to flee from.
has no cure, they are confident that their daughter      II
Even though Josephine's parents know that Aids
will live for a long time, given the correct care. The
fruit hanging from the avocado trees and the man-
goes ripening in the branches are harvested and a
share kept for their ailing daughter. A special diet •
of fish and a daily dose of compassion have brought
the Oderas closer to each other than they have
been in a long time.
And whenever Makokha visits to check on Jose-
phine, she is treated like a very important visitor:
"You raised my daughter from the dead," says
Odera.


• Parents should not make a fuss about finger-


Don't fuss


sucking by infants as this is normal behaviour at

that age. The habit can be discouraged aftewards.

• Do not punish the child or inflict pain on the

thumb to discourage the habit. Instead, create

discipline by explaining why you dislike the habit.

A child will only agree to listen and change if he

is convinced about why he should.

• The child should be given some responsibili-

ties around the home to prevent idleness. Tasks

given to the child should involve use of the hands ..
Consider activities like keeping rabbits or chick-
ens.

• Give a token whenever the child does not suck
his thumb.
• As much as possible, avoid leaving the child
on his own.
• Children ought to be told that they can get ill,
and what diseases they can get, if they do not quit
the habit.

ammutisoke@yahoo.com
