Daily Nation! Thursday, April 25, 2002

FORUM FOR PRESENTATION OF NEW FINDINGS

Over the years, the Kenya Medical Association
(KMA) has continued to
advance the aspirations of the medical
fraternity. This includes the quest for
professional knowledge and improved standards
of medical care. Towards this end, the world
renowned East African Medical Journal has been
published regularly with contributions and readership
covering most of Africa. Medicus, a more
free reading publication, is also being revived.
KMA has always recognised the need for
decent housing for its members hence the initiation
of affordable housing schemes. The first such
scheme was built in South C, Nairobi. Two more
projects in Lang'ata area are underway. It is
hoped that these initiatives shall be expanded to
other towns throughout the country.
The annual scientific conference provides a
forum for presentation of new findings and
exchange of views within the medical profession
both in Kenya and the world at large.
KMA finds itself at a crucial time in the history
of this country, when it must playa pivotal role in
a changing political, economic and social environment.
Concern over poor health services especially in
the public sector, occasioned by demoralised doctors,
has led to KMA lobbying strongly for the
improvement of terms and conditions of service
of doctors. This culminated in the recent increase
in the allowances payable to doctors in the civil
service.
It is hoped that this is but a beginning and that
discussions will continue on ways of improving
the working environment of doctors and other
health workers in order to stem their exodus to
foreign countries.
HIV/Aids remains a major health problem in
Kenya and sub Saharan Africa as a whole. Prevention
of mother-to-child transmission of HIV
virus requires specific mention given the potential
for preventive drugs in this area.
Healthcare financing is another vexing anomaly.
Human rights form an integral part of the medical
profession and KMA views with concern the
breach of rights of all groups within society, particularly
rights of inmates and those' in police custody.
'
A programme to educate medical practitioners
and the disciplined forces on these rights is underway.
The reproductive and sexual·healthrights of
women have gone unrecognised for a long time.
This has led to deaths due to unsafe abortion, sexual
violence and other forms of aggression on the
gender. This is a matter that will require enlightenment
of the medical profession and the public
in order to come lll?:.~ that safeguards
the rights of all. ,.;;<7:"~·'
Kenya Medical A_iation is not withdrawn
from the constitutional making process. We
believe that many of the issues mentioned can be
addressed through provisions within a wellformulated
constitution.

DR. JAMES NYIKAL, KMA CHAIRMAN

LEADING CAUSE OF DEATHS IN SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
Kenya Medical Association, E,I,doret division, wishes.
to welcome all participants tQ tbe 30th Kenya MedIcal
Association Scientific Conference and Annual
General Meeting. "
The conference has attained real regional status. In attendance
are, delegates from Uganda and Tanzania and this is in
the spirit of the East African Community. I would like to
acknowledge the presence of the representatives of Uganda
Medical Association, Tanzanian Medical Association as well as
members of the medical boards from the three East African
countries. I also welcome all my medical colleagues and other
professionals who are present attending the meeting.
The conference began with a pre-conference football match
between Kenya and Uganda. The scientific sessions start today.
As the theme of the conference states, "HIV/Aids: The emerging
challenges of total quality health care in Kenya": the meeting
has come at the right time in the evolving scenano of HIV I
Aids.
Twenty years after the first clinical evidence of ~ids ~as
reported, HIV/Aids has become the most devastatIng ~Isease
humankind has ever faced, with 60 million people havmg been
infected to date. An estimated 28.1 million people now live
with the virus in sub-Saharan Africa, while 2.3 million Africans
died from Aids in the year 2001. ..
This makes HIV/Aids the leading cause of mortality In sub-
Saharan Africa.
The papers being presented will address the global burden of
the infection situation of HIV/Aids both in Kenya and Uganda,
manage~ent of HIV/Aids in general, but more spe~ifically
focusing on the use of anti-retrovirals, and the preventIOn of
mother-to-child transmission.
Apart from HIV /Aids, malaria is another major cause of
mortality and morbidity not only in Kenya, bu.t in the sub-
Saharan, region and other parts of the developIng world.
Tuberculosis is on the rise, and there is a noticeable increase
in prevalence of the chro~non-infectious conditions. These
areas are also being addressed by the conference.
The issues of quality of health care in general calls for scru- ~
tiny of our health care delivery system. Healthc~re financin~
and how it relates to the quahty of health care Willalso be diScussed.
This will later culminate in the political parties symposia on
health and policy that we hope will be attended by representatives
of all major political parties in the country.
I would also like to thank all the people who have worked ~
tirelessly to make this conference a success and in particular
the organising committee and scientific commit.teeip' Eldoret ~
national executive council led by Dr. JamesNYlkat, Apex Co
munications and our sponsors .• -- ~
I also invite all of you to attend our dinner dance on Satue
day April 27, 2002. ~
•Dr~S~~~~?NtlegeK,MA Eldoret division cltairman