Sunday Nation/ September 1, 2002

Suffering of the body, purifying of the soul
By JOE BABENDRIEIR
 
Her eyes stared at the wall in front of her as if
she were contemplating eternity. The woman sat
outside the hospital room where her husband
was dying of Aids. She was staring at death -
her own. It was a look any hospital worker
knows all too well. Before the year was over, it
was her turn. Her last breath turned her only
child into an orphan.
If we can find a cure for Aids, we should. But
that will be too late for millions. Is their suffering
in vain? The substance of a recent letter to
the editor put a new perspective on the question
posed to Jesus Christ by his disciples: "Will only
a few be saved?"
Will only a few manage to get through life without
horrible suffering? Are the ones who escape
suffering better off? And which ones make it to
heaven? Are suffering and salvation connected
in some mysterious way? These are the questions
for which we need answers.

Simple but striking insight
The letter from this reader was especially provocative.
She opened her heart on this difficult
subject and said: "We all would like to go to
heaven because we dread hell. But sin is attractive
and has the power to lure us all." Her
insight is simple but striking. Isn't it true that lots
of people look at heaven merely as an escape
from damnation? For some people, living an
upright life seems impossible. Their life is a kind
of hell. They must feel like Mary Magdalene
before she met Jesus, when she was possessed by
seven devils.
Yes, sin does lure us. This seems to be Jesus's
answer to the question about how many will be
saved. He said: "Try your best to enter by the
narrow gate, since the road that leads to perdition
is wide and spacious and many take it. But it
is a narrow gate and a hard road that leads to life
and few there are who find it."

Reach their destination
Once we begin to take these words seriously, it
appears that HIV may be a blessing. Some of
those travelling the wide and spacious road
would reach their destination except for the pain
they are forced to endure. This suffering has the
overall effect of turning them around. It purifies
them spiritually. They change from being sheep
without a shepherd, lost on roads leading to selfdestruction,
and find themselves walking up that
other road - the hard one, the one that leads to
the narrow gate.
Find a cure for Aids, if possible. Teach everyone
self-control, if possible. Some say we are succeeding.
Others say we still have a long way to
go. The good news is that God has his way of
writing straight with crooked lines, no matter
what we do. Jesus is surely thinking of those who
suffer from Aids when he says: "Come to me, all
you who labour and are overburdened and I will
give you rest."

Effect of purifying
How can suffering do anybody any good? For
the same reason that Christ's death achieved salvation.
We will never understand it completely.
But we know that it works this way. St Paul
insisted that his own suffering was achieving this
mysterious effect of purifying himself and others.
As he said in his epistle to the Colossians: "It
makes me happy to suffer for you, as I am suffering
now, and in my own body to do what I can to
make up all that has still to be undergone by
Christ for the sake of his body, the Church."
As Pope John Paul once said: "Christ opened
himself from the beginning to every human suffering
and constantly does so. Yes, it seems to be
part of the very essence of Christ's redemptive
suffering that this suffering needs to be unceasingly
completed."
Like the Lamb of God dying on the cross, even
innocent children infected with HIV achieve
immeasurable benefit for someone else who
needs it. "Suffering is something good,. before
which the Church bows down in reverence with
all the depth of her faith in the Redemption."
