Sunday Nation! February 3, 2002

'He was not bothered by my HIV status'

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 2
during our marriage I had left my marital home
because of that. Many times I had been infected
with' sexually transmitted diseases."
Fortunately, Naisiadet had a good job as an
accounting supervisor with an international bank in
Kenya, so she could support her children.
But her health started failing. "My skin was, and
still is, my biggest problem. I had to spend a lot of
money on medication. Alarmed at the medical
bills, the bank investigated my case and discovered
I was HIV-positive. They fired me. At that time
(the 1980s and early 1990s), the stigma facing
HIV/Aids was enormous, and I became an
outcast."

Life for the single mother was tough, and things
got worse when her father disowned her. "He
wanted nothing to do with me. He saw me as an
embarrassment to him and a liability because of my
health, family and economic woes."
Friends too abandoned her. "They did not want
Abe associated with me. I was so alone, all by
~self, when I most needed their support." Her
self-esteem suffered a crashing blow. "I felt dirty
and contaminated. I was ashamed of what I had
become and my self-confidence was very low.
Rumours were flying all over the place about my
condition. A few people attempted to talk to me
about it, but I was in serious denial and refused to
discuss the matter. I began hiding from my friends.
I was afraid to mix with people and shunned social
engagements. "
She desperately needed a job
Naisiadet needed alternative options. "I began
meeting HIV-infected people, and together we
formed the Kenya Aids Society that was headed by
Joe Muriuki. Later, I joined Wofak. I was getting
emotional support from a social circle who identified
with and understood my situation."
Naisiadet desperately needed a job, and got one
as marketing director with an international yoghurtproducing
company. But it was short-lived; soon
the employer found out she had the virus and fired
her.
It was time for drastic measures to turn her life
around. "I decided to move to the US and change
•. life completely - for better medical care and to
.oid the social stigma."
Trouble brewing back home
In 1996, she moved to the US. However, she was to
discover that HIV stigmatisation was not peculiar to
Kenya. "I went to see a dentist, and in the patient's
form I ticked HIV-positive. As soon as the dentist
saw that, she requested me to leave her clinic and
come back after three hours to give her time to sterilise
the room." Insulted, Naisiadet never went
back.
Trouble was brewing back home. "My children,
then aged 10 and eight, were being told that I had
abandoned them and gone to the US to die? I was
so angry when I learned about it. I spoke to my children
and reassured them that I was not going to die
soon and would be with them for a long time to
come."
The following year, 1997, she took her children
with her to the US.
"My t-cell count was very low and I was very
sick. I told my children that I was HIV-positive, but
not before I had taken them for counselling. Now,
~es 16 and 14, they are living happily with me.
~ .. ~~ are in high school. They love and are proud of
~ me. I have God to thank for that."
Healthy eating and exercising
"It is very important for infected women to maintain
a social support network because this helps to
boost their self-esteem. You know that you are
loved and are not alone. Most importantly, the family
should support the patients."
To keep healthy and happy, Naisiadet takes good
care of herself. "I took anti-retrovirals for two years
and stopped because the side-effects were too much
for me; I constantly felt nauseated and tired. My
remedy now includes healthy eating and exercising
a lot. I have love all around me from my children
and husband who gave me a second chance, and
from the friends I have today".
Naisiadet can testify that being HIV-positive is
not the end of the world. "The most important thing
is to lead a positive life, and you will live long."