Sunday Nation! June 23, 2002
Oxana on worldwide campaign against HIV

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 2

the murky gutters of Kibera slums. Two kilometres
she covered on foot. No strutting nor swinging her
back. The simple police trot; fast and sporty but
perfectly well managed.
Love, mercy, pity, peace and helping those in
need.
So her lunch she forfeited for the love of the
Aids-orphaned children of Imani Children's
Home, also at Kayole. The children, too, were
touched, and showered her with grateful songs,
dance and poems.
Oxana was touched, dipped her generous hands
in her bag and dished out a wad of dollar bills for
the children. Probably they can have lunch tomorrow,
too.
It was Oxana's first encounter with HIV-Aids
victims in her life, and she had better get used to
this routine.
As Miss Universe, she is going to be an ambassador
against HlV-Aids for one year. Theresa Beyer,
vice-president of the Miss Universe Organisation
in New York, is with her on the Nairobi trip, and
says Oxana will spend a year working on the HIVAids
campaign.
Year-long worldwide campaign
"She will be raising funds, creating awareness, talking
to the pharmaceutical companies, talking to
women around the world."
Oxana could have chosen to go back home to
see her parents after she was crowned Miss Universe,
but she decided to first come to Kenya to
kick off her year-long worldwide campaign against
HIV-Aids.
Trouble for her boyfriend, St Petersburg businessman
Vladimir? Not quite, he's not been
ditched. But Oxana will hardly have time for him
this year.
ary Hilliard McMillan, the Miss Universe
public relations officer, said the
beauty queen still loves him very much
but for the next year or so her focus
will be completely different. "She has no plans to
marry or engage herself in a relationship of any
kind at this time".
But Oxana remains the same passionate, kindhearted
person. "I've not changed and I'll not
change. I'm the same person I used to be," she said
in an intervi~w with Lifestyle.
Passion for the lowly and the wretched
The Miss Universe Organisation in collaboration
with Global Health Council and Kenya's National
Aids Control Council and their associates had
made prior arrangements for Miss Universe to visit
Kenya after the beauty pageant, which was held in
Puerto Rico one month ago.
Like the late Mother Teresa of Calcutta, Miss
Universe has a passion for the lowly and wretched.
At the Imani Children's Home, she cuddled
baby Grace Wachuka with greater passion than the
poor mother who abandoned the newborn two
months ago.
The Imani founder, Ms Faith Wanjiru, did not
meet her special guest; she had gone to fend for
her children who know her as Mama.
As she crisscrossed Nairobi's Eastlands and
~uthlands on a trip to see the wretched of the
.......-earth, the people on her route were curious.
"In which car is Miss Universe?" asked a group
of Kibera slum dwellers hurrying to catch a
glimpse of her. She was in a celebrity maroon,
four-wheel-drive Toyota jeep. Here she toured a
project by Kibera Community Self-Help Programme,
headed by Mrs Ann Owiti.
Oxana's handshake is a heartwarming grip, a
tight clutch and not a superficial tough.
Darkness cut short her day
When darkness cut short her day, she decided to
wave away her feelings on the children making her
feel so longing to come again.
Oxana visited one of Africa's leading study centres
for children with HlV-Aids. She met her
match at Nyumbani Children's Home, lO-year-old
Laura Poshel or Miss Nyumbani. They stroke and
strolled hand-in-hand.
Faces were lit with excitement at Nyumbani
Children's Home as Oxana took a blood test for
HIV-Aids. Want to know her status? "The results
can be sent to her in no time," said Mr Musa Ali,
a paramedic working at the home.
Nyumbani Children's Home in Karen looks
after 79 abandoned children, and takes care of
another 500 who are on an outreach programme
that caters for Nairobi's slum areas.
Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament from India
look after the children at the home, which was
founded by Fr Angelo D'Agostino in September,
1992.
When Miss Universe flies out of Kenya on
Tuesday night, she will be flying with deep feelings
from Nairobi's children in her heart.
For winning the crown in Puerto Rico a month
ago, Oxana will take home prizes worth about
$250,000, in addition to promotional contracts and
a two-year scholarship to The School for Film and
Television in New York. She will spend a year in
New York on a salary and is provided with a luxury
riverside apartment.
Crown of diamonds and pearls
"I feel good. I haven't been this happy in a long
time," Oxana said last month as last year's queen,
Puerto Rican Denise Quinones, placed a $250,000
crown of diamonds and pearls on her head. "This
is the first time my country has won."
Miss Panama, Justine Pasek, 22, won first
runner-up. Next year's pageant will be in Panama.
Miss China, 19-year-old Ling Zhuo won second
place. It was the first time China sent a contestant.
Miss South Africa, 22-year-old Vanessa Carreira,
took third place.
