Daily Nation/ Thursday December 5,2002

Researcher moves to circumcise adult males

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 1
argue thill the evidence from small-scale surveys is
not conclusive enough to qualify circumcision as an
intervention.
Other scientists have dismissed the studies, saying
they do not show any causal relationship between
circumcision and reduced rate of HIV infection.
Hence demand has increased on studies to
produce hard data.
IN particular, scientists have refused to dismiss
such a correlation and are determined to investigate
more, ,~specially with indications of circumcised
males with low viral loads showing less likelihood
of transmitting the HIV virus to their female
partners.
Prof Achola's study has generated some heat
among local scientists. Many question the costs,
safety and ethical aspects of it.
Some scientist are afraid the costs of mass circumcision
may be so exorbitant as to make the
strategy financially prohibitive.
Mr James Ntozi, a Makerere University lecturer,
is afraid money will be diverted from other social
needs to pay for the circumcision.
Others say the safety issue must be thrashed out.
They point out that some men have died from major
complications after circumcision and that it is, at
any rate, too invasive a procedure.
Prof Achola, however, argues that his team employs
circumcision experts supervised by a Data
Safety Monitoring team of Kenyan and American
experts.
There are concerns that men circumcised in this
way may engage in unprotected sex, thinking they
are fortified against HIV. Indeed, interviews show
that they consider circumcision as an invisible condom.
Says Kisumu's John Odhiambo:"1 have heard of
this thing about circumcised men not getting infected.
I think that, in that case, one may not need a
condom because one is naturally protected."
The Population Council of Kenya fears that, in
this circumstance, "men may use their circumcision
status as a reason for not using condoms and women
may be less iriclined to insist on condoms if their
male partners are circumcised."
"In this scenario," says the council, "wom~n are
at an increased risk of contracting the virus and this
may reduce the potentia] beneficial effects On HIV
transmission of male circumcision".
Others fear a resurgence of FFmale Genital Mutilationif
circumcising men is linked to HIV prevention.
But Prof Achola insist~ his team has addressed
all the ethical issues. i
"We are very aware that sonie young men may
engage in unsafe sex thinking circumcision makes
them safe," says he. "Our apprfach is to educate
them on HIV/Aids and we empHasise to them that
no authoritative evidence exists yet to indicate circumcision
reduces HIV infection.
Another argument against the study is that it
may interfere with certain communal norms connected
with circumcision. Consequently, any attempt
to use circumcision against HIV infection
may meet much resistance.
Besides this, the age at which a person needs to
be circumcised has raised other practical issues.
Th,ere are worries that older men may be left out of
the strategy, since studies elsewhere in Africa show
that circumcision as an anti-HIV measure is more
effective beforeor soon after puberty.
[n 1999 study in Uganda, Kelly Kiwanuka found
that men circumcised before puberty - between 13
ancl 20 - had a lower risk of HIV infection compared
with their uncircumcised ones.
But, despite the various opinions, researchers
believe studies must be carried out to put all these
issues to rest. The results of Prof Achola's study are
expected in five years.
But, he says, the study will be discontinued if it
overwhelmingly indicates that the percentage of infection
among men circumcised during the study is
significantly lower than infection among the uncircumcised.
And conclusions will be made based on the result~:
at that particular point.
Many scientists, although believing there is a
correlation between circumcision and HIV infection,
they are yet to find out just how this happens.
Several scientists hypothesise that the foreskin
has a high density of cells known langerhans which
represent a possible source of the first conduct and
conduce to HIV infection.
Iru the 19H9 Lancet No H660, D. Cameron and
others, in their paper "Female to Male transmission
of HIV type 1: Risk factors for seroconversion in
men", claimed that the foreskin might provide an
environment in which bacteria and viral matter may
survive long enough to increase the likelihood of
HIV infection.
Its susceptibility to tears, scratches and abrasions
may also increase the chances of one contracting
the virus.
-AWe-Features