Sunday Nation/ November 10,2002
YOUNG WOMAN STEPS UP POETIC DRIVE AGAINST AIDS

BY TONY MOCHAMA
The tall young woman strides the stage
with confidence and grace, her voice
melodic and passionate as she recites:-
"Let the word go forth, to friend and
foe alike, that it is a new day! Let T
Young woman steps up
poetic drive against Aids
there be, in this place and elsewhere - no-one
faithless, no-one careless, no predator. .."
Her name is Pamela Ateka and the predator she
is fighting worldwide is Aids (Acquired
Immuno-Deficiency Syndrome). Her crusade
against the epidemic (said to have claimed at least
24 million lives in sub-Saharan Africa) has taken
Ateka places, from the community-based
organisation of dusty Kayole, Nairobi, to the
conference halls of exotic Egypt.
Pamela has worked with HIV positive women in
WOFAK (Women Fighting Aids in Kenya) and
rubbed shoulders with the high, such as former
South African President Nelson Mandela, and the
mighty, like Mr J.P. Garnier, Chief Executive
Officer of GlaxoSmithKline.
Anyone watching the special programme,
Staying Alive, on the Barcelona Aids Conference in
early July (that was aired on Nation TV on
Kenyatta Day) would have recognised Pamela -
tall, dark and smooth-skinned - as she listened
intently to former American President Bill Clinton
eloquently state what needs to be done by the
world to fight the greatest predator of humanity in
the late 20th and early 21st Century.
Pamela's weapon of choice is her God-given
talents to create community awareness, not just
about the disease but also about other problems
"such as environmental and political malaise."
She adds: "Poetry is my armoury against Aids,
but I also tell narrative oral tales to communicate
against ethnic hatred and in-fighting."
Prefer being told stories
But why use art - poetry and story-telling - to
communicate her message instead of simply telling
it as it is?
"We Africans prefer being told stories an'd
vitendalVilis, as opposed to dry prose and hard
facts. By using poetry, my audiences find our
anti-Aids messages easier to conceive, chew,
swallow and digest."
She has been to several countries to represent
her community of Urban Kayole - and to also
spread the message that "No carelessness + no
faithlessness = No Predator."
From the beautiful capes of Cape Town (where
she met Mandela) to the dry and sunny
desert-scapes of Alexandria, where she attended a
Youth Employment Summit, she has taken that
message.
Pamela is grateful to the GTZ (German
Technical Co-operation) for the YES (Youth
Employment Summit) that" was called to call for
youth action against global joblessness".
Africa's problems, she says, are all inter-twinea,
the one blending into the other. "We cannot discuss
them as separate entities or endemics."
She was a delegate at the last OAU policy
meeting convened to draft a plan of action against
ageing - although the Pandora's Box of Aids may,
paradoxically, make longevity the least of Africa's
Ateka: "Story-telling is effective"
According to
Clinton, scourge
is the greatest
predator of
humanity
problems.
The poetess has touched elbows with many
interesting and amusing fellows. They include
renowned CNN journalist Charles Hodgson and
Hollywood actor Rupert Everett (who played the
gay guy, George, in the 1l)l)l) Julia Roberts
mega-hit, My Best Friend's Wedding).
In one of life's unhappy coincidences, Everett,
2X, actually happens to be gay in real-life, an
anti-Aids activist and one of Pamela's favourite
personalities.
While praising the countrywide VCT initiative
(Voluntary Counselling and Testing centres),
Pamela would rather the campaign shifted more to
infected and affected people leading positive
lifestyles as opposed to local celebrities blandly
telling the youth that maisha itaklllVa poa (life will
be fine) once you have discovered your status.
Pamela says: "VCTs are relying on the idea tha
people want to know their status so that they do
not spread the disease, but with most HIV positive
people in Africa unable to afford three square
meals a day, with most of them unemployed or
being re-trenched shortly after they fall sick, with
the stigma and discrimination that come with the
Aids, there is very little incentive to go find out
one's status."
It is the gravity of this problem that brought
Pamela (and 200 others from all over the world)
face-to-face with Mr Clinton at the Barcelona Aids
conference in July.
Pamela says: "Clinton was very eloquent about
the Aids problem, very knowledgeable. He showed
how it is not only a sub-Saharan tragedy but one on
the Indian sub-continent, too. Clinton raised the
alarm on the explosive threat Aids poses to China,
Russia and Cuba, the way all the world's
hemispheres are under a fierce threat."
The former US President urged Western
governments and multi-national pharmaceuticals to
wake up fully to the danger of Aids and do more,
in pricing, aid and research-and-development, for
poorer nations.
Mr Clinton may have been polished in his
passion but it was the grand old statesman of
Africa, Mandela, who won Pamela's heart in past
February.
A poignant story
Says she: "I was down in Cape Town to discuss
'Human Rights and HIV status'. Mandela was
charismatic, mesmerising. He told us a poignant
story of a young lady whom he helped support
through high school and college, who recently died
of Aids."
The Kenyan anti-Aids crusader's own passion is
partially fuelled by the death from the scourge of
her elder sister, at only 30.
Pamela's eyes cloud over as she recalls her
sister's final days ... a hunched little figure on a
woven mat on a bare floor. She often massaged her
into the small hours in a futile attempt to ease the
pain coursing through her frail body.
During the interview with Lifestyle at Maision
Francaise, Nairobi, Pamela recalled those dark
days with a load of sadness.
This may be the end of day but the beginning of
hope if all people realised, as Pamela has, that
although not necessarily infected, we are all
affected in one way or the other by the worst
plague to ever plague humanity - since the
London rats of 1666 and the Spanish Flu of 1922.
"We must fight it with all we got,
bare-knuckled," Pamela says. Her knuckle-dusters,
The famous actor sees the Church as part of the it seems, are lines of poetry.