Sunday Nation/ August 18, 2002

THE TRIBULATIONS OF A SLOPES BACHELOR

Some decades ago, there existed the
characters called bachelors and they
survived basically because of a number
of things. One of them was that there
were other characters called Patel who
had gone to school and read medicine. The Patels
knew the needs of the bachelors then and so when
they were reading medicine, they paid special
attention to a drug called penicillin.
The bachelors also survived because there were
ather fellows who had not read any medicine but
who made it their business to sell medicine all the
same. They were characters who could neither read
nor write their own names but all the same turned
themselves into street pharmacies.
The characters sold .only three drugs. They were
a tablet called MB, another one called Suta and
some capsules withaut a name. The street
pharmacists stood at- street corners and after
ensuring that there was no man trained in Kiganjo
around, they started announcing what they had on
sale. They normally said under -their breath:
"MB:Suta-Capsules kama umeungl/a."
MB was just a white tablet and although the two
letters simply meant May and Baker, being the
makers of the drug, it was supposed to cure
anything ranging from a headache to stomach
ulcers. Suta was a brown tablet and it too was
supposed to teach many diseases a lesson. Thus if
thugs set upon you and nearly cut yaur leg in twa,
you did nat have ta warry. You just crushed some-
Suta tablets into pawder and paured it inta the
wound .. The wound was suppased ta understand
that it was being dealt with by Suta and therefare
needed ta behave itself.
The more the colours, the tougher
The capsules came in many calours and the more
calaurful it was, the taugher it was suppased ta be.
The capsules were hawever suppased ta deal with
one main problem. It WaS a prablem that afflicted
bachelors and it was what the street pharmacists
called "kuungl/a" or being burnt. That was their
way of saying suffering fram the many tribes .of
diseases that are relatives .of Aids.
Aids had nat discavered itself by then but its
relatives were there and came in many tribes. They
did nat kill and any bachelar warth his name had ta
suffer from .one .of the "kuungl/a" diseases or the
ather. The first time yau gat it, yau went abaut
telling any bachelor wha wished ta listen ta you
that you had been hit by it. If yau were nat hit by it,
yau imagined yau were and went telling everybady
abaut yaur suffering.
Yau did sa because it was the .only way of telling
the warld that yau were so taugh that you had been
involved in certain encaunters .of the adult kind
that had resulted in yau being' afflicted with
samething that required you to visit Dr Patel .or the
characters who sold MB, Suta and Capsules. It
seemed that it would be knawn you were tough
only if you were struck by the relatives .of Aids.
For most .of the days when I was a bachelor, I
avoided senior sins because I had graduated from
the position of an altar boy under the regime of
that Italian priest called Father Camissassius. The
Italian with a peeling nose had warned against what
he called the sins of the flesh and sa I did nat get
the disease that would have led me to the street
_ pharmacies or Dr Patel.
That, hawever, did not stop me fram cammitting
the smaller sin .of telling lies that I had been struck
by .one of thase terrors that came after an
encounter with a 'daughter of the soil. In my
faalishness, which I mistook for wisdom, I told the
bachelors who were willing to listen: "I have been
struck by the burning one. Indeed, I have been
burnt out totally and it is all the work of Lucia."
Lucia was the most beautiful girl in the village.
She was also in the habit of rejecting the
. applications of the young men in the village. She
actually walked and talked as if she was the sister of
a number of saints. Indeed, she was not the kind .of
girl that any fe\law with jigger-infested toes was
gaing to approach. It wauld have been a miracle far
Lucia ta suffer fram anything mare than a common
cold.
I, hawever, told the lie that I was in the state that
the fellows wha sold Suta, MB and capsules called
kuungua for two reasons. One, so that the other
bachelors would know that I, san of Appep, was so
tough that I had managed ta talk Lucia, the
daughter of Baranjeska, into sin. The second
reason was to give Lucia a bad name. She deserved
a bad name because of behaving as if she was the
sister of Jesus.
The other characters believed me and so they
loaked at me with envy. A man who had been
inflicted with something deadly by Lucia was to be
admired. From then an, Lucia entered the list of
shame.
This is to say that I did not visit the street
pharmacies or Dr Patel but sti\l I know what
happened when a bachelor was struck. by one of
those burning diseases. We did not have real money
so the first option was to head to the street
pharmacies armed with something like ten bob.
Ten bob was just about enough money to buy a
prescription.
You approached such a pharmacist with caution
since you did nat want your future mather-in-Iaw
see you shopping for the capsules. So yau looked
down the street and .once sure that the wrong eyes
were nat loaking, you stood near the character wha
was mouthing, "MB, Suta capsules kama
umeungua. "
Once you were there, you said under yaur
breath, "Lete tatu". The fellow decided that he was
not going to give you the three capsules yau wanted
befare he interrogated yau. So he asked, "Ni ya
homa kali ama homa isiyo kali sana. Karim ni homa
kali, nunua kapsul tano. Hizo ni twenty bob. " (Is
this far a major cold or for a mild one? If it's a
major one, take five. That will be twenty Shillings)
By homo, the fellow did not mean ~ camman
cald. He meant the affliction that was a distant
relative of Aids. When he asked you whether it was
homa kali, he wanted ta know which, tribe the
affliction belonged to. In short, the fo::lIow was
trying ta be a Dr Patel in his own way although he
had nat laoked at baoks, be they of medicine or
otherwise. !
'Leave out any alcohol'
After you explained whether it was hOff/a kali or
not, the fellaw passed the capsules to yau secretly
as he mumbled, "Na usikunywe pombel
, ukilumia
hizo kapsul, Zina chemical ambayo' haipendi
pambe." (Do not take any alcahol, the capsules
have a chemical that dislikes alcahal).
Thus you left the fellow assured .of tatal recovery
but then things never worked. They never worked
because some of those capsules were mere
vitamins. They were not supposed to attack the fire
that was burning a specific part of the body. That is
why it was impartant to visit Dr Patel. :
, The Dr Patel up the Slopes where I was barn and
brought up was visited by the bachelors wha cauld
affard a whale 30 bob. Thirty bob was what yau
paid the man for a full dose .of penicillin so that the
homa kali induced by sinning cauld bo:: cured.
Thirty bab was what it cost to buy a breathing gaat
accompanied by its kid, meaning real wealth.
. That is why Dr Patel was open to negdtiations.
This is to say that he understood the pains of a
bachelor paying so dearly for his sins an4 that is
why he told yau, "I can give you half an iinjection
and you pay fifteen bob only. Then cOl11e vilh
another fifteen and ve kamp/itthe other, gaf1le shot,
eh?. " ,
I know bachelors who went for that o!!'tion of
getting half a dose of penicillin after paying fifteen
bob. Then they vanished ta do what they called
"listening to themselves" that is finding out haw the
half dose of penicillin was treating them., If they
faund they were improving, they did not return to
Dr Patel.
When such a charact.er faund the need to visit Dr
Patel again, he went there under a new name
because he did not wish the goad dactor to
remember that he had not returned after paying
fifteen bob only. He thaught that Dr Patel had the
brain of a Bombay goat but that was far from the
truth. When he saw a face once, he could not forget
it sa when a fellaw went ta Dr Patel and lied abaut
his name, the man from Bombay pretended that he ~
had never seen him and proceeded ta prepare his
equipment· for injection with a lot of ceremony.
Then he injected the fellow 'with samething that
could not cure what the fellow was suffering from.
This meant that the bachelor was not cured and
had to return to Dr Patel with his case now very
serious. A certain part of his bady was now like a
volcana and so he paid the whole thirty bob and the
man from Bombay said, "My prend, vwai you get it
all the time? Vwai not marry?" Many bachelars did
not have any answer as to why they were being that
faolish.
It is many decades since the days of MB, Suta
and Capsules and what was homa has now become
something else. These days it does not send yau to
Dr Patel. It sends you into forgotten history
because when it hits you, you become Rast tense. It
all goes to say that there is every danger in being a
bachelor since chances of getting to the age of the
Son of the Soil are very slim if you have this idea
that you live in the days when Whispers was a
young man.
It is also not funny being a bachelor boy because
even the cost of buying the sins that will make you
past tense is very high. It invalves such gifts as
Nakia or Siemens mobile phanes, meaning a major
dent in the packet. In our days, it either cost ten
bab for what you paid the street pharmacist or five
bob, being the price of soda and the biscuits that
you baught far the girl who came visiting you.
BE AFRAID: Over 200,000 Kenyans contract Aids
every year. Subsequently about 2.2 million Kenyans
live with HIV infection. Roughly 1.5 millian people
have died of Aids in Kenya since it was first
detected in the country. In the year 2000 alone,
lS0,OOOpeople died .of Aids.
nyaituga200J@yahoo.com, www.whis.com