Daily Nation/ July 31,2002

TURNING ADVERSITY INTO A MISSION
The day of her husbands funeral, she learnt that he had died of AIDS

Omukuba died in July last
ily put out a notice in the news-
Ituary pages with the international
f compassion for Aids sufferers. It
in Kenya, and even at his funeral,
f Omukuba's death was openly
"to's widow, Jackline Namusia,
AMBOKA OYAHO about how
news and her struggle to live
ar after burying her husband.
The words still bite. "Do you know
what killed your husband?" the Red
Cross workers who had brought his
body home asked me. Why were they
asking me sueh question, I wondered?
And why now? Why did they
not just leave me alone to mourn? All I knew was
that my husband had been unwell and had died as a
result of illness.
Then they dropped the bombshell: "Aids," they
told me. "Your husband was killed by HIV." I was
. speechless. Even before the enormity of their words
could sink in, they began to advise me about the
implications of being infected with the virus that
causes Aids.
It all sounded incredible. But it had to be true,
because everyone was speaking openly about it at
the funeral. Everything seemed to be happening so
fast.
I had met and fallen in love with Tito in August,
IlJlJlJ, while staying with my sister at her marital
home in Eshirotsa, Khwisero constituency. He told
me he had been working in Nairobi but the contract
had ended and he had decided to return to his rural
home.
We had been married for about a year when our
son, Peter, was born in July 2000. At about that
time, my husband fell ill. He was taken to a hospital
in the village, but his condition did not improve.
Sometimes, when he felt a little beller, he would go
out to drink with his friends. At other times,
though, he was too weak to get out of bed.
Farm work
Eventually, Tito's sister, Margaret, came and took
him away with her to Nairobi. I was left with my
son, who was a month old then, and my mother-inlaw,
who was unwell. I kept myself busy looking
after them and with farm work, ,ind did not even
think to find out what Tito was suffering from. I
just waited for him to get better and come back
home.
While he was still undergoing treatment, his sister
brought him home. He wns still sickly. Whenever
I enquired about his health, he became angry.
Sometimes he would tell me that he might
recover from what was ailing him, or he might die.
He was speaking in parables and I did not know
what he meant. At other times he empathised with
me, but I thought that was unnecessary since he was
the one who was sick. I. on the other hand. was
fine, going about my chores as usual.
But on July lJ. 20t)) , exactly two years after we
had started living together as husband and wife,
Tito died. I still did not know what had killed him,
and did not suspect anything, not until those Red
Cross workers told me the truth.
The events of that day still come to me like a bad
dream. I didn't know much about Aids then. but
every time I looked into the innocent eyes of my
son, I shed tears tears of hopelessness.
And then things started to fall into place. When
he was seven months old, my son became anaemic
and had to have a blood transfusion. It must have
been as a result of his weak immunity. Some tests
were done on us, the baby and I. I guess one of the
tests was for HIV, but the results were not disclosed
tome.
Even now. no one has really ever told me that I
am HIV positive, but I know I am. I cough, I have
been treated for tuberculosis, I have these skin
rashes, surely I don't have to lie to myself that I
escaped the disease. I look at my son and deep
inside I wish that he turns HIV-negative arid lives
on to perpetuate our names.
It is now one year since Tito died. Although I
had only been married a short while, my sisters-inlaw
said that I should stay on and they would take
care of me. Still, it has been a year of great pain for
me. In September, about three months after Tito's
death, my mother-in-law also passed away. I was
suddenly left alone with my son in the homestead. I
busied myself with farm work but when through
with the work, what else does one do? Thoughts of
how cruel life can be flooded my mind.
No more tears
But now. I don't cry any more. Why cry for what
you cannot change? The self-pity, the regrets, and.
the tears are gone. My sister-in-law Margnret, who
nursed Tito until his demise. and I have made n
resolution: together we must help young people to
avoid getting infected with HIV.
Since Tito loved football, we arc using the game
to sensitise young people to issues relating to Aids.
We have organised a soccer tournament in memory
of my husband, and on August 10. I will be at
Eshirota Primary School cheering the tenms competing
for the trophy. I believe the tournament will
encourage young people to come out and be tested
for HIV/Aids.
I feel for women who may find themselves in the
situation in which I found myself. I passionately
appeal to them to go for testing before becoming
sexually involved with anyone. There is no point in
crying later over what you could have avoided.
. Those alrendy infected should not look to "spread
it", as this will expose them to the risk of ·reinfection.
Instead, they must seek to live positively.
There arc men who claim that Tito was
bewitched and we just claimed that he died of Aids
so that they don't come for me. I look at them and I
feel so sad, that with all the information available.
about Aids still peqple want to endanger their lives.
The only person who gives me courage to live
each day is my son.
