Sunday Nation/ October 13, 2002                                            • LifeSTYLE •                                                                                            7
--------------------------------~--------------------------------
The interwoven Contraceptive, anti-Aids drug? Try lemon juice!
                                                                                               ustralian   scientists believe they     often freely available in third world
                                                                                                                                       come by.
                                                                  J
  edges of good                     A                                                           have rediscovered an effective use     countries where contraception is hard to
                                                                                                fo'r lemon       juice   -   as a
                                                                                       contraceptive and a killer of the HIV/Aids
                                                                                                                                          Short said laboratory tests found not only
                                                                                       virus.
                                                                                          Reproductive physiologist Roger Short,       does lemon juice kill sperm, it also kills the
                                                                                                                                       but it had fallen by the wayside over the :
     and evil                                                                                                                          Aids virus itself. Short said using lemon
                                                                                        from the University       of Melbourne's
                                                                                                                                       juice as a contraceptive was not a new idea ~
                                                                                        obstetrics department, said a few drops of
                                                                                        lemon juice can be a cheap, easy-to-use
                                                                                                                                       years.
                                                                                        solution to protect women from both HIV
                                                                                        and pregnancy.
                                                                                           The juice should be squeezed onto a         Used by Mediterranean women
                                                                                      . piece of sponge or cotton wool and placed      The ancient douche-style contraceptive was
              Caror-                                                                    into the woman's private parts before sex,     encouraged by such luminaries as Casanova,
              Mandi                                                                    he said.                                    reknowned for his sexual prowess.
                                                                                          "We can show in the lab that lemon juice   "This has been used for hundreds of years
                                                                                       is very effective in immobilising human     and we've just forgotten about it," said
              That's Life ~                                                            sperm and in killing HIV," Short told . Short, who is planning to conduct some field
                                                                                       Australian Broadcasting Corp television in trials in Thailand.
                                                                                       a science programme shown on Thursday.            "About 300 years ago, Mediterranean
                                                                                          He said lime juice, which has similar acid   women used lemon juice as their main
                                                                                       levels, can also be used, with both fruits      method of contraception." - Reuters
  "The inability to tetl goodfrom evil is the greatest worry of a man's
  life"           ..
                 .iththe great technological advanc~mentcman has
  - Cicero    ·   ,                             ,
  W         .     made in science and technology, to tl:' le~e.l~h~re .
              . '~ourpower to destroy, nay, oblitep,e hfe ISmflmte, It
                  has.become essential that we r1jCUSS values and
                                                       our
  morals, ifonly to refrain from foolishW-narmfu~ be~aviour.
     However, the dilemma that mode!,,,man faces ISthIS;never .
  before have the edges of what is r.sat and wrong or good and eVil
  been so interwoven. Consider.tIIs: Mu~h of ~he condu.ct that was
  considered 'wrong' in ourp-dndfathers day ISnow bemg preacheq
  as right.     -             ,
     Back in the days <:frride. nd Pr.ej~dice,when it .was considered
                                 a
  'unbecoming' for.adles to entertam gentlelT!en WIthout a chaper-
  one a Maasa;·.lOran could plant a spear outSIde the manyatta of a
  ma~iedw"J1an and entertain himself,while her husband was kept
  outsid" proving to us that cultures and generations may differ on
  Whll"Sright and wrong .
    .clack then, female circumcision and hitting one's wife to 'disci-
 pline' her were considered goad and loving actions. One must
 wonder then, does right and wrong change with each generation
 and culture?
    Secondly, while the act may be the same, it is generally agreed
 that one's motive will determine whether their behaviour is good
 or evil. The biblical commandment - Thou Shalt Not Kill - is
 one such example, especially in instances of mercy killing or
 euthanasia. While each of us may have strong views on the sub-
 ject, we accept that these may not be as clear-cut when we, our-
 selves, or a loved one are suffering under a debilitating disease.
    However, actions which are motivated by good causes are gen-
 erally pardoned even when they result in misfortune. In such
 instances, we come face to face with the uncomfortable question;
 which is the greater good and which, the lesser evil?
    Third, who are the custodians of our morals? Is it the reigning
 'civilisation' and empires of our day? Especially when these same
 'empires' find themselves groping in the dark and are probably
 more immoral than we are? In some European countries it is
 unlawful for adults to have sexual relations with minors yet quite
 lawful for the same adult to log on to an adult site on the Internet
 that uses children or child like figures in sexual acts. Talk about
 double standards and these are the educated civilisations we are
 supposed to be taking our cues from.
    Martin Luther King Jr. warned that the "The most dangerous
 criminal may be the man gifted with reason, but with no morals."
 He also added, "We must remember that intelligence is not
 enough. Intelligence plus character '- that is the goal of true edu-
 cation ... If we are not careful, our colleges will produce a grO\lp
 of close-minded, unscientific, illogical propagandists, consumed
 with immoral acts."                     .
 True north never changes
 Finally, is there such a thing as absolute good or right? I like the
 definition of Stephen Covey, who writes in The Seven Habits of
 Highly Effective Families that there is such a thing as 'true north'
 in determining moral values.
    He writes that true north, "never changes. It represents a natu-
 ral magnetic force on the earth. I have used this demonstration in
 places throughout the world - including on ships at sea and even
 on satellite broadcasts with hundreds of thousands of people par-
 ticipating in different locations around the globe. It is one of the
 most powerful ways I have ever found to communicate that there
 is such a thing as magnetic north. I use this i.llustration to make the
 first point: Just as there is a 'true north' - a constant reality out-
 side ourselves that never changes - so there are natural law or
 principles that never change. And these principles ultimately gov-
 ern all behaviour and consequences."
    As Covey asserts, when most of us encounter the big universal
 questions, we generally have a common understanding of what is
 right and what is wrong. We try to locate true north. It is right for
 a mot~er to nurture her child. It is wrong for a man to take an
 innocent life. It is right for a teacher to correct a student. It is
 wrong fora person to take another's property by force. It is right
 to care for the less fortunate. It is wrong to victimise the weak, and
 so on.
    It is usually the gray areas, those instances where what is right
 and wrong seems to be two sides of the same coin that we rarely
 know what to do? Who can conclusively say what the good cause
 of action is then? While it may have become more difficult to
 determine,   we should consider our motives, the means of achiev-
  ing our aims and the consequences of our actions. So help us God.
  cmandi@yahoo.com
Page 


-------------------Trial Version-----------------------

Convert PDF to Text Desktop Software.

Copyright Convertpdftotext.net 2014.

To remove these lines, please activate your software from http://www.convertpdftotext.net/buynow.htm

-------------------------------------------------------
