                                                                                                    I SUPPLEMENT I                                    31
                                                                                                                                Insecticide
                                                War Against Malaria                                                              treated nets not
                                                                                                                                only repeU
                                                                                                                                mosquitoes when
                                                                                                                                 but are also kiUed
 Treated nets                                                                                                                    they approach,
                                                                                                                                 if they come into
                                                                                                                                 net. Moreover, the
 crucial in                                                                                                                      contact with the
                                                                                                                                 insecticide also
                                                                                                                                 noxious pests
"'fighting killer                                                                                                                kills other
                                                                                                                                 such as lice,
                 nsecticide-treated mosquito nets and curtains are key to the
               advocates an integrated approach to the malaria problem.
     I        global war against malaria. Use of treated nets is one                                                             cockroaches, bed
              component in the Global Malaria Control Strategy that                                                              bugs and sand
          The strategy advocates four technical measures: sustainable                                                           flies
      preventive measures such as the use of insecticide treated mosquito             A PSI team promotes ITNs in rural Kenya
      nets, early diagnosis and treatment, early detection and prevention of
      epidemics, and strengthening local research capacities.
           In Kenya, efforts are being made to promote the use of nets as an
      effective way of controlling malaria. These efforts particularly target
      the most vulnerable groups - children under five years and pregnant
      women. The two groups are particularly susceptible to malaria.
      Children under five years account for over 1)0 per cent of the deaths
      due to malaria worldwide.
           Specifically, treated nets are crucial to combating the disease, since
      malaria-transmitting        mosquitoes are largely active at night, when
      people are asleep.
           In Kenya, the culprit vector is the female of the species Anopheles
      Gamhiae. These human-biting species feed indoors, an activity that
      reaches its peak between IOpm and 4 am.
          This means use of treated nets can provide protection from
      infective bites. Various studies have shown that use of treated nets
      reduces mortality bctween 2S and 40 per cent, and hospital
      admissions due to malaria by almost half.
           Presently, families spend a lot of income on anti-malarial drugs,
       insecticide sprays, coils and other prevention methods.
           In a study done in Western Kenya, it was found that over a
       four-week period, households using insecticide-treated         nets spent on
      average Shl) on malaria treatment while those who don't use these
       nets spent an average ShSX over the same period.
           When nets are treated with an insecticide, they give the users
       double protection. Not only are mosquitoes repelled when they
      approach, they arc also killed if they come into contact with the net.
       Moreover, the insecticide also kills other noxious insects such as lice,
      cockroaches, bed bugs and sand flies.
           Experts recommend that the nets be re-treated with insecticide
       before the onset of the rainy season.
           However, the use of treated nets is not as widespread as might be
       desired. This is because, neither nets nor the required insecticides are
       widely available or affordable in most communities.
           Population Services International (PSI), a social marketing
       organisation, intends to increase use of insecticide treated (ITN) in
       Kenya. It wants to improve on the level of household ownership of
       nets which stands at a paltry IS per cent countrywide.
           The NGO intends to bring the treated nets within IS minutes' walk
       for people living in malaria endemic areas.
           With assistance from USAID and DFID, PSI markets the nets for
       malaria prevention, hormonal contraceptives for family planning and
       condoms for HIV Aids prevention.
            Recently, the organisation launched an ITN called SlIpanel and an
       insecticide retreatment kit called !'OIverlah, which are now available
       locally.
            PSI plans to increase the availability and affordability of ITNs by
       getting shops, dukas, supermarkets and other traders to stock the
        nets. It will also conduct education campaigns so that people know
       where to buy the ITNs. This will raise public awareness on the
        importance of sleeping under ITNs and the need for regularly treating
        the nets.
           The campaign's overall goal would be improved supply and
        promotion of mosquito nets by Kenyan manufacturers, and increased
       demand by consumers for better prevention of malaria.
            "To get the communities to be pro-active in protecting themselves,
        we have to work on misconceptions regarding how malaria is
        transmitted and the effectiveness of ITNs", says Dana Tilson, ITN
       Technical Advisor at PSI. "Effective messages will help create
        demand."
            Social marketing has become an important way to deliver needed
        health products to low income people in developing countries, and to
        motivate the use of these products .
.           The products, procured from international suppliers, are
l~distributed          through existing commercial distribution networks. They
        ar~ branded and packaged locally and sold at subsidised, affordable
        prices.
            Commercial marketing techniques together with public education
        are employed to motivate the use of the products. However, these are
        sold at cost and no profit made to them.
            In Kenya, the majority of those who know the benefits of
        insecticide treated nets are those who live in urban areas and can
        afford to buy a relatively expensive net at commercial prices. Even
        when nets and insecticides arc available, demand is limited by low
        levels of knowledge regarding malaria prevention and the benefits of
         ITNs.
            For poor peopie, especially in rural areas, high prices and '
        availability are major obstaclcs to obtaining ITNs.
            PSI's campaign is aimed at helping overcome some of these
        challenges. Increasing the number of households owning nets is a
        major challenge, but. unless people use treated ncts correctly and
        consistently, the rate of malaria deaths and illness will not be reduced
        substantially.
Page 


-------------------Trial Version-----------------------

Convert PDF to Text Desktop Software.

Copyright Convertpdftotext.net 2014.

To remove these lines, please activate your software from http://www.convertpdftotext.net/buynow.htm

-------------------------------------------------------
