DAILY NATION
Nairobi, Saturday, December 9, 1989
Not quite a cure, but what promise

Let the entire world keep ita fingers crossed and pray tha
this will be it. Kenya’s researchers and scientjst8 at th
Nairobi-based Kenya Medical Research Institute (Kemri
have given humankind another ray of hope in its flgh
against the fatal disease, the Acquired Immune Deflcienc3
Syndrome (Aids).
The researchers have developed a promising drug in thE
battle against the scourge that threatens to decimate th€
world’s population. “We do not claim to have a cure fo
Aids, but we have given Aids sufferers the best chance
available and. another chance to lead normal lives,” was the
nvetting message from Kemri’s director, Dr Davy Koech.
Equally captivating were the details: The drug, code.
named KE089, has been administered to a number of
people and the symptoms of the disease were erased in a
matter of days. Fifteen of the sufferers were invited to the
celebrations to mark Kemri’s tenth anniversary last
Wednesday, a day which, Dr Koech said, they might not
have lived to see. .
That is good news indeed, for there is hope that the drug
coLild be developed into a cure, and our own medics will
have struck a blow for science, for the whole world against a
killer that stalks mankind with a chilling and menacing
vengeance. Our ardent hope and prayer is that our hard
working medics and scientists will strive even further
towards this goal. That is the ultimate.
We are, quite naturally, cock-a-hoop about KEOS9, as are
the unfortunate victims of Aids, in particular, and the
. world, in general, but, like President Moi and Dr Koech
said, the drug is not yet a cure, and Kenyans must not relax
their morality. It is tempting - very tempting, in fact, for
some people to let their hair down, and resort to
promiscuity in celebration.
Don’T Do That. That is the message, that is the counsel,
rom the President. Like the President said, Kenyans must
.emajn decent people, even when a cure for Aida is
discovered. Put the way Kenyans know it best, Zero-
Grazing must continue, for that is thebest way to combat
the disease until such a time as a cure is found.
The news from Kemri would suggest that a cure may well
be in sight, and perhaps what Kenyans can do to hasten the
advent of that day is to support the institute in every
possible way in its endeavours to get a cure. If it be a
question 6f funding, we would urge the Government to
supplement whatever money there is already at the disposa].
of Kemri. The researchers can rest assured that they have
the moral support of every single Kenyan.
The reason for this is, of course, obvious. There are an
estimated 250,000 Kenyans who are thought to be afflicted
with the HIV virus which causes Aids. They are healthy,
normal and active, sexually that is, but they do not know
that. they are Aids carriers, because they have yet tddevelop
the symptoms.
That scenario is as staggering as it is horrifying. The
prognosis is simply shattering. That is one important
reason why every single Kenyan is very excited about
KE089 and why Kenyans must continue to adhere to the
Ministry of Health’s guidelines on the prevention of the
spread of A’dS.
When all is said and done, however, the indication is that
Kemri can save the world. Kenya can take the lead in the
fight against Aids, a disease which has been used to malign
us and which has been unfairly claimed to have originated
in Africa.
Good luck, our researchers at Kemri! The whole world is
looking to you fôr a cure, and that is no mean task. We are
solidly behind you, and we hope you will do us proud.
