NATION June 6 1987
Mammoth death talks amidst indifference
By IRWIN ARIEFF,

WASHINGTON, Friday
In a vast hotel conference hail in
central Washington, thousands
sit in sober silence as scientist
after scientists talks of what can
and cannot — be done about a
grave and terrifying disease.
But in a nearby exhibit hail
and in the street outside, the atmosphere is almost like carnival. reminding those at the third
International conference on Aids
that life, commerce and politics
can exist side by side with death.
In the exhibit area, homosexual rights activists promote tolerance and better care for victims, most of whom have come from their ranks, while medical technology firms sell blood testing equipment and Latex gloves.
In one corner, a laboratory
testing machine endlessly inflates
a condom to the size of a water
melon, then deflates it and starts
all over again.
On the sidewalk next to the hotel, a crowd looks on as a man
dressed in a “grim reaper” costume offers sarcastic thanks to a
man posing as Lis surgeon-general C. Everett Koop.
 “Does circumcision predispose
one to Aids?” asks a handbill dis
tributed by a smiling representative of the National Organisation
of Circumcision Information Re
source Centres of San Anselmo, California.
The week-long conference, the largest held to date on Acquired
Immune Deficiency Syndrome,
has attracted over 7,000 researchers, public health officials and groups with keen – sometimes life and death — interest in the
issue.
Nearly 1,000 members of the
Press had signed up for at least
some part of the conference, officials said. 
Large crowd-control signs posted around the hotel are a
constant reminder of the mob in attendance.
“The conference is over-sub
scribecf,” the signs read. “Entrance to sessions is on a first-
come first-serve basis.”
Banks of television lights and
hot, humid weather has aggravated the situation by sending temperatures soaring in some of, the
conference rooms and in the hall ways outside.
One young woman, a health official from Connecticut, solved
the problem by attending sessions in shorts and a bright red
T-shirt with the slogan, “condoms are cheaper than coffins”.
Her message trumpets the view of researchers who say regular
use of condoms helps prevent the spread of Aids.
While the big names of the Aids research world present their
findings in the hotel ballroom, which can hold several thousand
people, lesser lights are relegated to smaller.
And with more than 1,000 papers being presented at the conference, many researchers —
about 150 each day — do not even get a speaking forum and must summarise their work in posters
, pinned to bulletin boards.
“Important posters must be removed by 4.00 p.m.”, say signs
placed between the rows of posters.
Study titles range from formidably academic to terse: “Evaluation of human immune deficiency
virus 1GM and Antigen assays for determination of perinatal infection with HJV,” read one. “Aids
in Canada. Heterosexual transmission,” said another. (Reuters)
