DAILY NATION TUESDAY SEPTEMBER 5, 1989
CONDOMS NO SUBSTITUTE TO FIDELITY

At last week’s seminar for journalists on Aids, Professor
Joseph Oliech, the Director of Medical Services, warned that Aids threatened our survival and that of future generations. Are condoms the answer against this threat?

Dorothy Munyakho participated at the seminar and gives her view.
At last week’s two-day seminar for journalists on Aids, this message recurred constantly chastity outside marriage and fidelity within it are the best safeguards but where this is apply, condoms to minimise the infection.
In fact condoms have become so integral to the global Aids campaign that one may be
Forgiven to suppose that the two approaches — chastity and fidelity on one hand, and condoms on the other, are interchangeable options.
The liberal provision of condoms at the seminar display table and the speed with which they disappeared testifies to the
importance that has come to be
attached to condoms as a shield
against the spread of Ada.
I was one of the panelists invited to address the topic: “How
journalists can help to change attitudes and sexual behaviour.”
Promiscuous sex has all along
been associated with the spread
of Aids, and one would have expected the media to preoccupy it
self with how best to transmit
messages that emphaise the opposite of promiscuity. Not quite.
The message was, clearly, abstinence and marital fidelity for
those who can practise the twin
virtues, and condoms for those
who cannot.
A brief overview of how the
above message was put across
will suffice.
Even after a highly positive
message which decried the glorification of sex, use of sex appeal
in advertising, sexy music and
love songs, the director of Medical Services, Professor Joseph
Oliech, still found it necessary to
digress and say: “We need the
disc jockey at the nht club to
talk about condoms.
Prof Oliech had pinpointed the
social approval of having many
girls and boyfriends and extra
marital affairs as being conducive
to the spread of Aids.
“Because of Aids, we are telling
people now that all that is wrong
and risky: that this has to change
— for their survival and the survival of future generations.” the
OMS had said Still, he found a
place for condoms, if only in one
sentence, thereby diluting the
very powerful message he had put
across.
The deputy programme man
ager of the Nations Aids Control
Programmes (NACP), Mrs Margaret Gatei asked: “Is abstaining
practical? If not, why talk about it?”
I found Dr Dundu Owili’s position ambivalent. While acknowledging that condom promotion
and use in rural areas poses disposal problems; while acknowledging that some Kenyan men
cannot use condoms because of
their communities’ style of circumcision; and while further acknowledging that some condoms
were inappropriate for Kenyan
men by virtue of their size, Dr. Owili, who has chaired the clinics sub-committee of the NACP,
still thought that condoms should
continue to be promoted for Aids
control, provided that their promotion is accompanied by education on their proper use.
The chairman of NACP’S Information, Education and Communication sub-committee. Dr. Sobbje Mulindi, underlined NACP’s stand on condoms say
ing: “In the absence cf anything
else, what can we do””
It is important to note that Dr. Mulindi and his colleagues all
agreed that condoms are not fool
proof as shield against Aids, and
they are only offered as an option
for those who cannot abstain
from sex or be faithful to their
marital partners.
I could go a step further and
rule condoms out altogether because not only do they reinforce
sexual attitudes conducive to the
spread of Aids and other sexually
transmitted diseases, but they
also offer a false sense of security.
On average, 10 out of every 100
women using condoms as a contraceptive device become pregnant, and there is no reason why
the condoms safety record should
be better in Aids prevention. The Aids virus is infinitely smaller
than the male sperm, and chances are that the failure rate
of condoms in Aids prevention
will be even higher than in
contraception.
This failure rate is compound
ed by the fact that while women
can only get pregnant on five
days within a menstrual cycle,
the risk of Aids, especially among
the high risk groups - notably
the prostitutes, is daily. And
while it is only a woman who is
capable of pregnancy in case a
condom fails to prevent contraception, both men and women
risk Aide in promiscuous sexual
encounters.
One of the questions I would
have loved answered at that seminar is just why it is considered
impossible for people to abstain
from sex outside marriage. Is it
really true that there are people
who will not change their sexual
behaviour even when it is a life
and death matter?
If it be true, what are the circumstances that make people impervious to change? Can they be
altered?
At a recent workshop on Aids,
pert of the family life promotion
congress, Dr Cecilia Pypsr of Oxford, England, addressed this
same issue. Why are people not
changing their habits in spite of
knowing all about Aids?
The answer lies in the manner
in which the message has been
put across to them, and Dr Pyper gave the example of two frogs.
One is put in cold water, which is
then heated gradually to boiling
point. The other is thrown in hot
water. According to Dr Pyper,
the first frog will die in the boil¡ng water, while the second frog
will jump out immediately, there
by saving itself.
The moral of this is that the
full implications of irresponsible
sexual behaviour need to be put
across without creating the falie
hope that condoms will save us
from ultimate disaster.
This1 point cannot be over
emphasised especially as regards
women. While it is quite possible
for a man to get away with Aids
even in an “unprotected” sexual
encounter because he dips in and
out and washes or wipes his or
gan, thereby minimising the risk
of exposure to the killer virus, it
is not so easy for women.
Our sexual organs, unfortunately, act as a reservoir, and retain sperms and other germs that
may leak through the condom.
Scientists think that infection
from Aids is largely a result of
Concentration of infected sperm
either in the female genitalia or
in the rectum in case of homosexual encounters. It is also true that
all sexual encounter is accompanied with some degree of trauma,
which makes it easy for the HIV virus, in this context, to get into the blood stream.
Clearly, the best strategy for crushing Aids would seem to be
preventing all risky sexual.
