November 25, 1989
WORLD FOCUS TURNS TO THE ANTI-AIDS CAMPAIGN

By OTULA OWUOR, Science Editor

Tomorrow, Kenya joins the rest
of humanity in marking World
Aids Day.
Aids, a disease which emerged
under a cloud of much controversy and mystery eight years ago,
as now taken a firm hold in
countries. The Acquired
mune Deficiency Syndrome
(Aids) caused by the human
immuno-deficiency virus (HIV)
already threatens the lives of up
to 6 million people in the world.
In Kenya, where the first Aids
case was noted in 1984, up to
6,000 people have developed the
disease while many others may be
carriers. Aids can no longer be confronted. i.e. has no cure
and prevention remains the only
salvation. The ‘virus can .infect
anybody and the Ministry of
Health, through the National
Aids Committee (NAC) is trying
against heavy odds to control or
curb increased HIV infections.
This year, the second World
, Aids Day focuses on the youth.
who are among the most vulnerable groups. The themes are: “Our
lives, our world — lets take care of
each other” and “ Operation
crush Aids; and the youth face
. the flghL” The Ministry, has
planned a number of activities to
help make people more aware of
how to prevent the spread of the.
deadly infection. .
There will be public lectures’
and the seriousness the Ministry
attaches to kids will be reflected
by the fact that. Ministers and
Members of the Parliament are
among the individuals scheduled
to deliver lectures.
The Minister for Health, Mr. Mwai Kibaki, will feature
Prominently in the activities of
the day accompanied by the
chairman of NAC, Dr J.R. Were,
who heads the clinical research
section of the Kenya research
institute.  The fighting AIDS campaign will
run from November 26 to December 3 and apart from public lectures, it will involve visits to
schools, colleges, markets, factories, clubs and talks to girl
‘ guides, boy scouts, KANU youth
wingers and Catholic youth associations. The churches, mosques
and temples should include special prayers for Aids patients and
all the institutions or groups may
get audio visuals on Aids from
the Aids control programme.
In. Africa heterosexual activities remain the major cause of
HIV. Socio-economjç and cultural factors make it difficult for the
Kenyan youth and those in other
parts-of the world to learn about
the dangers linkéd to sex outside
marnge or sex with many part
ners. I he youth, who are under
going major biological and physical changes driving them towards,
active sex. need to be told about
this new deadly infection.
Indeed, according to medical researchers, efforts have been
doubled to find methods of treat
ing Aids patients who lose their
natural ability in fight against
infection because the Aids virus
damages the cells involved in protecting the body. A cure may not
be found during this century be
cause of several factors. Chief
among this is the fact that the
virus changes or mutates rapidly
¡t actually enters our cells and
can lie dormant by inserting its
material into that of the
cells.
This year’s anti-Aids campaign
will be held in all the eight provincial headquarters — Nyeri,
Mombasa, Embu, Kakamega
Nakuru, Garissa, Nairobi and
Kisumu.
The emphasis on communication, information and education
on all aspects of the disease is an
indicator that everybody should
aim at preventing the spread of
HIV infection. Already the head
of the education, information and
communication subcommittee of
the NAC, Dr. Sobbie Mulindi, has
launched an aggressive campaign
aimed at all educational institutions. At the University of
Nairobi, the Association of Medical Studies is already involved
in the campaign, The Director of Medical Services, Professor J. Oliech, has repeatedly held frank
Discusions with the local Press
and urged them to-help in the war
against the spread of the virus.
The government has ensured
that all blood for transfusion is
screened for the presence of Aids.
‘This means that patients in need
of blood should be generally safe.
However, the negligible probability that donated blood could be
infectious because of false positive or negative test results has
been further minimised by the
fact that nowadays Kenyan doctors
resort to blood transfusions
only in extreme cases where the
lives of patients are threatened.
The Aids virus is also infecting
some of the children born to
mothers infected with the virus.
At first it was assumed that all
the children born to such mothers could be infected but it is now
known that some of them just
carry the antibodies transfered
from the mother but not the actual virus. Thus a number of children who test positive sometimes
begin testing negative after a while.
Still the children should be
breastfed and be given all the required immunisation, in addition, the doctor’s opinion should
be sought in case of only the tuberculosis vaccine.
Kenya recently asked for up to Sh216 million to help in its anti-Aids campaign. The Ministry
should be able to receive all the money because the country has taken the disease seriously and is
even attempting to integrate it into its primary health care programmes. Kenyan health workers have quickly been trained to cope with various aspects of the infection. This includes clinical management and counselling.
