{"text": "April 14,\u00a02010\nStigma much reduced due to awareness campaign \nBy NATION Correspondent\nWhen he rewinds his memory to 20 years ago on how mental illness was handled, Prof David Ndetei can afford a smile. Then, the stigma was at its peak, and the mistreatment of the mentally ill and disabled persons was the order of the day. \nFast forward to the present, the situation is much different. Psychiatrists like him say society is finally beginning to understand that mental illness is treatable or manageable, and that those affected can be productive members of the society. \nProf Ndetei remembers that in the 1980s and early \u201890s, the mentally ill would consult him only at night to avoid being seen.\u201cNow they walk into my clinic or other institutions catering for the mentally ill in broad daylight. There is much acceptance and willingness to help them, as people understand the disease better. This understanding is playing a major role in reducing stigma.\u201d \nBrain disorder\nDr Nelly Kitazi, the superintendent of Nairobi\u2019s Mathari Mental Hospital, thinks people are increasingly seeing mental illnesses as a brain disorder and not a personal failing, thanks to aggressive awareness by advocates, who include professionals, as well as politicians, church leaders and government officials. \nMr Pattni Prabhudas, the Kenya Association of the Mentally Handicapped (KSMH) secretary-general, notes that the mentally disabled are getting better treatment than was the case 10 years ago. During one of its awareness activities, more than 800 people responded to the association\u2019s call to families to register their mentally disabled members in the mapping exercise.\n\u201cThis impressive response does not only indicate that stigma is reducing, but will also help us to have rough idea of how many mentally disabled people are out there,\u201d says Mr Prabhudas. KSMH has enlisted the support of influential people in the religious, political and economic circles to help to fight the stigma. \nBut Kenya is not out of the woods yet; Prof Ndetei and Dr Kitazi say lack of understanding and misconceptions about mental illness is still fuelling stigma in many parts of the country. \nMain reason\nThe main reason why people stigmatise the mentally ill is that they link the disease to madness or lunacy, a curse or demonic possession, says Dr Kitazi. People with a mental disorder are viewed as dangerous, aggressive and uncoordinated, he adds. \nMedia and movies portrayal of the mentally ill in their language and images is said to reinforce and sustain this stigma as well. Owing to the stigma, people with mental disorder are denied access to jobs, loans, property ownership and other essentials of life just because people equate their mental disorder to madness. Their families fail to seek treatment as they feel ashamed to move with them in public. \nThose affected usually start stigmatising themselves when they see people rejecting or excluding them. Even their struggle to seek medical attention or to get well is compromised, doctors say. This stigma is the root cause of mistreatment, social exclusion and poor management of people with mental disorders.\nAdvertisement "}