{"text": "God Has Blessed Me With Yet Another Son\nAugust 18, 2010\nASUNTA WAGURA DIARY \n\u00a0\nIN THE NOVEL Things Fall Apart by Chinua Achebe, there's a story about a lizard saying something to the effect that, if nobody is ready to praise you, go ahead and praise yourself. And that's what I want to do.\nOn August 3, I celebrated several milestones. First, I turned 45. What's more, that day marked 23 years since I tested HIV-positive. At that time I was handed the death sentence like the Biblical King Hezekiah, who was told to put his house in order because his days were numbered. But at least he was lucky in that he had something good to remind God about so that he could be spared.\nLooking at my life then, I had no bargaining chip. But the funny thing is, God has given me more bonus years -and still counting -than He did Hezekiah. And this against so many odds, not to mention the six-month grace period that I was initially given.\nAs I celebrate my 45 years of life, God has added me yet another blessing. I have a new baby boy. Yes, he is biologically mine. I proceeded with my girl project but God, in His infinite wisdom, saw it fit to give me another boy. But he's a handsome baby, and I wouldn't exchange him for all the girls in the world. The joy still hasn't sunk in.\nIn yet another struggle to get this baby, I learnt one more thing: the importance of being with, and among, the right \"them\". This is because, right from the start, I was criticised for being extremely selfish for wanting another baby when I already had others. And as if that was not enough, I have HIV (What's being HIV-positive got to do with it?). As one local FM station asked, how far do I want to go with this life? The answer is, very, very far. Further than the skies. I have one life, and it's not a dress rehearsal. I must achieve all I want or miss the grace period God has given me.\nBy joining the right \"them\" -that is, other sisters above 40 who had fertility issues and were pulling all stops to conceive -I did the right thing at the right time.\u2028There were younger women, and others who were older, but we were all facing a common enemy. The online facility, Network 54, helped me to rationally look at my issues and realise that I wasn't doing badly. Other sisters encouraged me, adding fuel to my dream train. It mattered a lot to those who were wearing the same shoes as mine. I felt considerably younger because one of the women in our group was 59 years old. She had been denied assisted re productive technology (ART) in her country and had sourced this service from another country. She was eight months pregnant and it was like any other pregnancy.\nSo, to those who say I'm old I say, think again. I can do this\u00a0 again! I had Israel Munene on July 24. I gave him that name because I want him to be significant. In the Bible, Jacob had a few undesirable issues. Before God gave him the name Israel, he was a con artist and a man who remained indoors cooking (I don't like this kind of men). Later, when he wrestled with an angel, he was blessed and renamed Israel.\nI named my son Israel because I got him after wrestling with so many things in my life. For starters, to conceive, I visited half the gynaecologists in Nairobi. And I mean it when I say this baby has depleted my bank account and left me with a loan to service. He's not just a baby; he's a tribe, a nation borne of optimism. I want his generations to be innumerable and shine like the stars, for him to have dominion and prominence wherever he goes and to find favour with God and men.\nBut I also plan to let Israel know that, when he's in college, he'll have to work part-time because he squandered all his inheritance just to get here. For those who `walinikazia' (were mean) and I didn't get a baby girl, I wish you similar luck: may you have only boys! I'm on the driving seat and feel, at long last, as if I've managed to recapture what HIV robbed me of: full and fulfilled motherhood. Sisters, let this lady lizard gloat.\nasuntawagura@hotmail.com This is the diary of Asunta Wagura, a mother of two who tested HIV-positive 23 years ago. She is the executive director of the Kenya Network of Women with Aids (KENWA)."}