DAILY NATION WEDNESDAY AUGUST 5, 2009
LIVING POSITIVELY

Our future leaders know all about
HIV, but they’re making the ‘free
love’ generation of the 1960s look
like saints
What in the world do you do when your condom bursts in
the middle of a one-night stand with a total stranger?
And what if this happens while your live-in girlfriend is
sitting at home, pregnant with your child, you’re still in college
and your whole family is looking to you to give them a brighter
future? And what if you also have a problem with substance
abuse and staying faithful to your partner?
These are some of the tough questions that confronted me
when I went to speak about positive living to college youths.
I could hardly believe some of the things I was hearing and
struggled to keep a straight face because that’s what a counsellor
is supposed to do. Any show of anger or disgust and your client
will be out of the place quicker than you can say, “I’m sorry.”
It seems like all the work we’ve done on the ground over the
years about HIV awareness has fallen on deaf ears. How else
can I explain the issues that were raised that day? Either that, or
people truly believe they can never be infected with HIV until the
moment they actually test positive. It’s sad because all the road
signs are still as visible as they’ve always been: you can’t drive
dangerously on the road of life and expect to come out without a
single scratch, even if you’re the cat with the proverbial nine lives.
“Kufa dereva, kufa gari,” I once overheard a young man saying.
When I asked, I was told the Kiswahili remark meant something
to the effect that when a car is involved in a terrible accident, it
is highly likely that the driver will die and his car be written off.
In this case, the young man was the reckless ‘driver’ who had
unprotected sex with multiple sex partners. If he happens to be
infected, then so will his web of partners. Talk about throwing all
caution to the wind!
‘Free love’
This is what we’re now faced with; a new generation of future
leaders who know all about HIV, but who are making the ‘free
love’ generation of the 1960s look like saints. Nothing makes
me more concerned than speaking to a group of youths on
responsible choices until I run out of saliva – only to learn that
they haven’t put my counsel to any use.
A VCT colleague tells me she goes through the same thing:
“I’ve realised that once some young people test HIV-negative,
they take it as a certificate to engage in risky behaviour,” she
says. “They think they’re infallible, but the next time they come
for a test, they discover just how vulnerable they are.”
I’ll tell the youth who are living dangerously what I wish
someone had told me: living with HIV isn’t easy. Even if you don’t
suffer from opportunistic infections, and your CD4 count is
1000, this virus still has a way of freaking you out. It messes with
your mind, convincing you that you cannot do stuff you would
otherwise excel in. It makes you afraid of life. You hide from
people, including yourself. This virus gives you sleepless nights
because you’re constantly worried about your future.
I’m 43 now, and have lived with HIV for 23 years, which is the
average age of the youths I talk to about the virus. And whenever
I talk to them, I see myself two decades ago – but without
anyone to tell me the things I’m now telling them. Today’s young
people are bombarded with responsible living messages from all
avenues, but the opposite is also true: they’re being bombarded
with as many messages about irresponsible living.
Fragile age
Would I have taken heed had I been HIV-educated 23 years ago?
I don’t know. And that’s because I recognise that 20-something
is a fragile age. There’s peer pressure, newfound independence
and the urge to try new things and fit in. What I do know is that
these are dangerous times and they call for cautious measures
regarding the choices our children make.
My son, Peter, is a young adult and I worry about him despite
his having the facts at his fingertips. As I have counselled people
I’ve come to learn that irresponsible behaviour is like a chain
– one wrong choice leads to another. It may start with a burst
condom, which will lead a frightened youth to a VCT, where he
will find he is still HIV-negative, and think he’s invincible. My
friends and I say such a person is bound to go back to poke the
hornet’s nest even after surviving several scares. As a counsellor
and the mother of a young adult, my mind never rests. I am
constantly praying that my son will make the right choices.
asuntawagura@hotmail.com
Dangerous living
among the youth
This is the diary of Asunta Wagura, a mother of two who tested
positive 23 years ago. She is the executive director of the Kenya
Network of Women with Aids (KENWA).
