SATURDAY NATION November 1, 2008

Kenya fights for health funds

By CAROLINE WAFULA
Whether Kenya will continue
receiving financial support
to fight the three major killer
diseases — malaria, tuberculosis
and Aids — will be known soon.
Kenya will be arguing its case at the
Global Fund in Geneva in a week’s time
amid claims of lack of accountability in
its spending.
Yesterday, Public Health minister Beth
Mugo dismissed reports that Kenya had
been blacklisted by the fund, saying the
Government was optimistic that Kenya
will retain its place on the Global Fund
grants list for Round 8 and 9.
The minister said it was too early to
conclude that Kenya will not be able to
submit the Round 8 proposals for Sh24
billion and beat the January deadline for
the Round 9 funding proposals.
“We have not really been blacklisted.
We just have to supply some information
that the Global Fund wants. Otherwise we
have until January 21 to submit proposals
for Round 9,” she said.
She said it was premature to say that
Kenya should not apply for another round
of funding, contradicting Medical Services
counterpart Prof Anyang Nyong’o who
early this week called for an immediate
suspension of the Round 9 proposals.
“We cannot suspend the proposals for
funding as it would spell doom for crucial
health programmes,” she said.
Billions of dollars
The meeting with the Global Fund comes
against the backdrop of a recommendation
by the Global Fund’s technical review
panel that Kenya’s proposal for the Round
8 funding be rejected, saying billions of
dollars are unaccounted for.
The final decision, however, lies with
the Fund’s board of directors which meets
this month.
About 230,000 Kenyans are on antiretroviral
therapy with the HIV prevalence
rate standing at 7.8 per cent. Malaria is
responsible for 16,000 deaths annually
while Kenya is ranked 13 among 32 countries
with a high TB burden. There has
been an alarming increase in the disease,
which claims 70 lives daily.
A high-powered team is preparing for
a meeting with the Global Fund where it
is expected to argue Kenya’s case to be allowed
to submit further proposals for the
grant.
The meeting, Ms Mugo said, will clear
the air on the funding.
And as part of the preparations, the
minister yesterday set up a taskforce to
look at the areas of concern and submit a
report in seven days.
The taskforce will investigate why
Kenya failed to give the Global Fund the
required information during submission
of the Round 8 proposals.
Was at pains
The team is expected to review the status
of the programmes funded under the
grant, their cost and financing as well as
status of supporting documents.
Taskforce members are representatives
from the various departments that handle
money from the Global Fund.
Their mandate is to review audit reports,
identify any outstanding issues and
prepare an appropriate response that the
Kenyan delegation will present.
“The Global Fund has not said any
money has been misappropriated. This
team will therefore establish if any money
has been lost. If so where, how and how
much? The problem could even lie with
poor documentation,” Ms Mugo said.
The minister was at pains to explain
that the taskforce was not an investigating
body.
“The taskforce will only seek information
from people who were responsible for
the fund, which is different from a probe,”
she said.