Wednesday December 17, 2008
The writing is now on the wall: media
reports that many marriages are
under threat from the scourge of HIV
and Aids should be taken very seriously,
especially by married couples themselves.
This might well be the reality check we need.
As we commemorated World Aids Day at the
beginning of the month, the issue of HIV in
marriages explained the increasing number of
orphans in various parts of the country.
The reality in some households is a scenario
of an insidious killer whose consequences
are long-term in the form of socio-economic
challenges. We might be sitting on a viral
time bomb that many couples have taken
for granted even while their marriages have
become characterised by infidelity.
It is sad that the rate of married people who
are straying out of their bedrooms has been
on the increase, leading to the rise in couples
succumbing to HIV and Aids.
Some time ago, an eyebrow-raising study
revealed that many married women were
crossing marital borders for pleasure whose
fruits were unwanted pregnancies. The result
was that their husbands were unknowingly
raising children fathered outside the
marriage!
The study went on to say that 50 per cent
of married women were likely to stray and
consequently end up with the so-called “outgrower”
children. Maybe what we need to
imagine is the number of married people that
end up testing positive for HIV after such risky
adventures.
But married women are not the only
culprits. Married men are also fishing in
foreign waters. As one advert puts it, men
should “Wachana na mpango ya kando (forget
about ‘alternative arrangements’) for a better
future. Married men need to understand that
the grass will never be greener on the other
side. Those who are in stable monogamous
marriages should not be deluded by the
trends of an increasingly permissive society
and get stuck in immorality. This is because
the family, in spite of Western influence, or
our modern hectic lifestyles, or whatever
other challenges we face, will remain the
basic most vital unit of society.
The moment something bad happens to
the family, we can expect a long-term effect
to be felt by the entire society. And so far, we
are not doing too well leaving behind a trail
of Aids orphans in our wake. Being faithful to
our marriages is a virtue that will save society
from future problems.
The A (Abstinence), B (Be faithful), C (Use
condoms) and D (Take antiretroviral drugs)
approach that has been used to alleviate
the spread of HIV and Aids deserves some
mention with regards to the family. The way I
see it is that we have paid more attention to C
while the real issues lie in A, B and even D. We
might be chorusing the song of condom use
and importing millions of condoms, while in
fact the rescue vehicle lies in abstinence and
being faithful in marriage.
The fact is that unlike C, A and B will never
let us down. That is why children should
be encouraged to practice abstinence as
they grow up, and then go for HIV testing
before marriage. And once married, the vital
component of being faithful should become
part and parcel of everyday marital life.
If the latest reports on the spread of HIV and Aids are not enough to make everyone sit up and take
notice, then it might already be too late for us as a society, writes ESMOND SHAHONYA
How many more reality checks do we need?
HAVE YOUR SAY
Send in your 700-word article on matters
affecting the family to living@nation.co.ke
with “Have Your Say” as the subject. Living
does not pay for this column.