DAILY NATION Wednesday November 19, 2008

MY DILEMMA
Am I being paranoid about this friendship?
NEXT WEEK’S DILEMMA
I am a 32-year-old woman from the Kikuyu
community. My boyfriend is 33 and he is
from the Luhya community. We have
been dating for quite some time now; I
care deeply about him and he says he cares
about me too.
I have been hoping we could be married
soon, but there is a problem. My mother’s
sister is married to his father’s brother.
My side of the family says it’s okay for us
to get married because we have no blood
relationship, but he tells me that according
to Luhya customs we cannot get married
because we are related through marriage.
I really can’t understand why not seeing
as he and I share no blood relations. I am
confused and don’t know what to do.
Should I keep hoping that his family will
understand or should I move on without
him? I really love him but I feel as though
he is just looking for an excuse to marry
someone else. Please help.
‘Caught in a Twist’
Send in your answers, before noon on
Friday, to: The Editor, Living, P.O. Box
49010, Nairobi, GPO 00100; e-mail:
living@nation.co.ke with “My Dilemma”
as the subject.
READERS SAY
I am a 34-year-old man married to a lovely
woman who turned 29 two weeks ago. We
have two cute daughters aged four and two
years. Our initial two years of marriage were
wonderful and we were very happy. But some
time last year my wife, who is a banker, formed
a friendship with a man at her workplace and
told me about it. With time, I started getting
concerned that they were becoming too
close as she was spending too much time
with him. They would even go out for drinks
and she would tell me about it. Not wanting
to be difficult or feel insecure, I gave her my
blessings.
Lately, however, I can no longer stand it and I
told her to end the relationship because it was,
in my view, no longer healthy. She has refused
and says I’m being insecure over nothing. I am
now in a dilemma regarding what to do about
her defiance. I don’t know whether or not she
is cheating on me but I would be a fool not to
suspect something was going on. I care for my
family and I don’t want to end my marriage.
Please advise.

You must act now
It is an open secret that a large percentage of
married people have intimate relationships
with colleagues at work. No man should
allow his wife to go on a drinking spree with
other men. While she may be innocent, the
man involved is definitely up to something
sinister. God gave you the license to be the
head of your family and your biggest task
is to give direction. Sometimes we face
serious challenges and we must make serious
decisions no matter who gets hurt. Such a
time is now, when you must tell your wife
that the relationship is over, and make sure
she understands that your decision is final.
She needs to be responsible and remember
that she is now a married woman, not a single
teenager.
There are many ways of monitoring her
movements, and this might be necessary
before you make a decision. Use tact to avoid
more trouble. You also need to look within
yourself and find out whether or not your
wife might be bored with you. Sometimes men
make the mistake of assuming that everything
is okay, but a good sign of a satisfied woman
is one who always wants to be with her
husband.
You need to act now. If you investigate and
find out she is cheating on you, let her go. It
is better to lose your family than to go down
with Aids.
James Kioko Nzau, Nairobi