DAILY NATION Tuesday November 18, 2008 

EU threatens to withhold aid
By DAVID MUGONYI
and OLIVER MATHENGE

The European Union yesterday
threatened to withhold budgetary
support if the Waki and Kriegler
reports are not implemented.
European Commission head of delegation
to Kenya Eric van der Linden said the
Government should also review the Constitution
and land policies as agreed during
the peace talks that culminated in the
Grand Coalition Government.
The move to withhold budgetary support
would have an adverse effect on Government
programmes.
It would affect funding in education,
health, especially the fight against HIV
and Aids, and infrastructure projects,
mainly roads construction.
It will especially exert pressure on this
year’s budget, which has a huge deficit.
The Government had planned to raise
$500 million from the international market
through a sovereign bond. But due to
the international financial meltdown, this
is no longer possible.
Furthermore, the Kenya Revenue Authority
has already sent notice that it is
unlikely to meet revenue targets for this
financial year. If the EU withholds the
support, the Government will be forced
to borrow heavily from the local market
to plug the budget deficit, causing inflation
and interest rates to rise.
Although the constitutional review and
land reforms were part of Agenda Four of
the coalition deal, the Government has
been accused of dragging its feet in addressing
the two issues.
Asked what the conditions for the release
of the budgetary support were, Mr
Linden said: “We are waiting for the Waki
and Kriegler reports to be implemented.
The development group is also looking at
Agenda Four. We are looking if all conditions
are met.”
He said the international community
also wanted to see issues related to corruption
addressed, adding that impunity
must be a thing of the past.
French ambassador Elisabeth Barbier
said the international community was
closely “watching and listening” to what
the Government would do with the Waki
report. She said they expected the Cabinet
to discuss the implementation of the
report when it meets this week.
“We are keen to see the implementation
of the report … there has been difficult debate
but we consider there is time for political
leadership of this country to take a
position,” said Ms Barbier.
End to impunity
She said the Waki team handled a complex
mandate and was transparent and
objective in the manner it recommended
an end to impunity in the country.
Ms Barbier said although there was
need for further investigations, it was
also necessary to reform the police force
as proposed by the Waki Commission.
The two were speaking at a press conference
at the French ambassador’s residence
when they briefed the media on
European Development Days.
The country’s 2007/2008 budget has
a deficit of Sh5.3 billion, with this gap of
about five per cent expected to be largely
filled by donors. The EU is one of the top
donors. Since 2002 it has financed the
Government budget to the tune of Sh28.4
billion.