DAILY NATION TUEDAY November 25, 2008

FIGHT AGAINST HIV

WOMEN TO PROMOTE MALE CUT
Age-old ritual shown
to reduce chances of
being infected with
cervical cancer

By JOHN NGIRACHU
Sparred an by reports of a significant
increase in HN infections among
married couples, health officials
want to involvewomenin the drive
to have more Kenyan men undergo circumcision.
Speaking at the launch ofthe voluntary
male circumcision programme at Panafric
Hotel, Nairobiyesterday, Public Health
and" Sanitation assistant minister James
Gesami sald the nrinistry would provide
free counselling for couples an the benefits
of male circumcision.
Counselling will be part of Govern-
Ijl'ent's strategy to promote the male cut
in Kenya, partly funded by the Bill and
Melinda Gates Foundation and the US
Government.
This fallows recent release of data from
the Kenya Aids Indicator Survey that
shows twa-thirds ofKenyan adults infectedwithHNare
legally married or cohabiting
and that in.one of every 10 marital
unions, at least one partner is living with
HIV; farming what doctors call 'discordant
couples'.
IMarried
couples
Dr Peter Cherutich, head of the national
task force on circumcision, said counselling
is critical for both married and unmarried
couples.
"There axe cases where the husband
sneaks out for circumcision and the wife
interprets that to mean that-he is prepax·
ing to become promiscuous, or that it will
have an impact on their sexual relations...
Women have to be involved for the full
benefits to be felt," Dr Cherutich said.
He said the one-month healing period
may also create problems as women may
notunderstandthe needfor prolonged abstention
from sex.
Parents will also be advised on how to
counsel their sons facing "the cut:'
Research has also shawn that the male
cut markedly reduces chances of infection
with the human papillomavirus that
causes genital warts and cervical cancer
- the leading cause of cancer-related
deaths in Kenya - by between 60 and 70
per cent. It also reduces chances of infection
with venereal diseases.
Public hospitals
Hospitals in Nyanza have recorded a
surge in people seeking the services at
public hospitals since circumcision was
endorsed by the areas politicians.
But officials say hospitals first must be
accredited to offer the services.
The task force has already developed a
manual and guidelines for circumcision
and come up with guidelines on it.