SUNDAY NATION November 9, 2008

Exploring issues of teen romance

Book sequel deals
with matter of growing
up, initiation into
adulthood and HIV

Title: Wait for me Angela and Walk with
me Angela
Author: Stephen Mugambi
Publisher: Kenya Literature Bureau
Reviewed by JOSEPH NGUNJIRI


Every person has a story or two to
tell about teenage romance exploits
and, for the most part, they
are filled with naïvetè. Yet this is
an important stage. And, for teenagers,
this is the reality of their existence.
Thus, a novel addressing teenage romance
is likely to resonate with the
youth, especially those in secondary
school. Stephen Mugambi must have had
this audience in mind when he wrote his
two books, Wait for me Angela and Walk
with me Angela.
The two books are mostly set at Kilimambogo
Secondary School, a mixed
boarding school in Eastern Province. Ben
Wangu is smitten with a girl in his class
called Angela Mueni.
He decides to do everything he can to
win Angela’s heart. It is not smooth sailing
for Wangu as he starts off on the wrong
footing with her, literally. He gets punished
for tripping on the girl. To Angela,
Wangu is a malicious boy to be avoided
at all costs.
Girl of his dreams
Not one to give up easily, Wangu embarks
on a mission to woo the girl of his dreams.
He soon realises that nothing short of a
sincere apology will make Angela see him
in a different light.
While the apology pays dividends for
Wangu, it should be looked at from a
wider perspective. Bearing in mind that
these books are read by the youth, the
message from the author here is that
being apologetic whenever one is wrong
can cover a multitude of wrongs.
This is especially so when viewed from
the perspective of the recent wave unrest
in schools. A lot of grief and damage
would have been avoided had the students
embraced a spirit of honesty, remorse and
forgiveness.
Angela does her part and forgives
Wangu, and soon a romance starts to blossom
between the two. If Wangu thought
that being in a romantic relationship was
going to be easy, then he was in for a rude
shock.
For one he has to reckon with Sandra,
Angela’s best friend, who harbours deepseated
suspicions about him. She is yet to
be convinced that Wangu is a changed
person. She is thus prepared to go to any
length to separate the two.
Many high school students and teachers
will tell you that boy/girl relationships are
actively discouraged by school adminis-
Book sequel deals
with matter of growing
up, initiation into
adulthood and HIV
trations. By deciding
to write about such a sensitive topic, the
author opts not to bury his head in the
sand by pretending that these relationships
do not take place.
The challenge, therefore, is for him to
tell his story without appearing to put
ideas into the readers’ minds. And this
he does admirably. To prove that he’s really
worthy of Angela’s attention, Wangu
has to first of all discard his bad ways and
work extra hard in his class work.
At some point, Sandra challenges Angela
to tell her how “far” she is willing to
go with the relationship. This is in clear
reference to sex. The author is alive to the
fact that many teenagers are likely to experiment
with sex.
It is this experimentation that has led
to unwanted pregnancies and spread
of HIV/Aids. The author provides more
checks and balances when he brings in the
guidance and counselling teacher.
The teacher, who has by now learnt
of the relationship, summons the two,
separately, and makes it known that the
two lovebirds will be under her watchful
eyes.
While on a weekly outing, Wangu visits
a bookshop in Machakos town and
there he meets Tressah, a beautiful girl
who served him at the counter; she turns
out to be the owner’s daughter. Tressah is
waiting to join the University of Nairobi
for her Law degree.
Soon, their friendship grows and, although
the author does not tell us how
Tressah feels about Wangu, we know
that Wangu has some romantic feelings
for her.
Wangu entertains the possibility of having
a relationship behind Angela’s back.
But thanks to Kigotho, one of their
classmates, Angela gets to know that
Wangu went to Nairobi to visit the other
girl at the university. With the help of his
friend, Patrick Mbaja, Wangu had lied to
Angela that he had gone to the university
to visit a cousin.
Deeply angered
Angela is deeply angered by Wangu’s betrayal
and decides to end the relationship.
Eventually, though, the two make up but
not before Angela gives Wangu a piece of
her mind.
In a strange twist of fate, Kigotho is
hit by a speeding vehicle just outside the
school gate, and dies.
By exposing Wangu’s secret, Kigotho
did show selfish motives, but one cannot
deny that he did the right thing. So the
question raised in the reader’s mind is: by
getting rid of Kigotho, is the author trying
to show solidarity with Wangu?
All in all, the author must be commended
for maintaining interest throughout
the course of the story in the two books.
And even though Walk with me Angela is
a sequel to Wait for me Angela, the author
has effectively made sure that each book
can be read on its own.
Wait for me Angela won the second
prize in the inaugural Wahome Mutahi
Prize for Literature in 2006.
jngunjiri@nation.co.ke