Wednesday November 19, 2008 DAILY NATION

LIVING POSITIVELY
Healing isn’t one of them; rather,
I need to be able to look after
those whose needs would make a
difference if only they were met
I know this is hard to believe, but when I look back, I feel the
best thing that ever happened to me was getting infected with
HIV. This virus has taught me a lot about courage, friendship,
and practically everything else I know about life. Why do I say
this? Because many are the times in my line of work, or even in
my social life, when I have met people who have the ‘answers’ to
my problems.
“Asunta, I know of a pastor who can pray for you to be
healed,” they will say, while extolling the amazing healing
powers of the pastor.
Correction: I am not a victim. I hate that label. I am simply
living with HIV, period. Victim implies a helplessness; that I’m
at the mercy of this virus. Truth is, I’m living my life to the
fullest, like any victor would. I don’t doubt that God can heal. It
is possible. However, one thing I now know for sure is that even
if I were healed today, it would not change any part of my life
because I made a conscious decision two decades ago to live
positively.
“I really don’t have a problem,” I categorically told one lady
who was on my case, believing that she was doing me the
biggest favour in the world. I wish people would see that there
are more pressing matters that need prayers.
Meant to be
I don’t know about you, but I think this was meant to be. God
meant for me to get infected so He could use me. Sometimes I
try to imagine what my life would be like if I were HIV-negative,
and I draw a blank. That’s because I have lived all my adult life
with this virus, and I think I would literally have to take a crash
course in living without HIV if I woke up tomorrow and found
myself HIV-negative.
Let’s talk about miracles. Right now I have over 400 orphans
and vulnerable children who need school fees. And if I don’t do
something real quick, they won’t see the inside of a classroom
next year. I wish these ‘concerned’ folks would pray so I could get
miracles for everyday stuff like this. The world doesn’t start and
end with me. It’s not only about Asunta. I’m just a cog, albeit a
visible one.
With all due respect, I wish that pastor I’m being told to go
and see about a miracle healing would pray so that my orphans
could find decent shelter and three square meals a day. I wish
there was a miracle so I could have salaries for my 100-plus staff
who care for people living with HIV.
“My problem is not actually my HIV status, but the way the
society reacts to those who are infected,” I politely told the lady
who was giving me directions to the faith healer’s haunt.
I’m thankful for the concern coming from all these wellmeaning
people. But I’ve said this before and I’ll say it again:
immediately after I tested HIV-positive, I spent a lot of time
rushing from one healing crusade to another. “God, I swear if
you heal me I will serve you for the rest of my life,” I bargained
with the Almighty.
Strange towns
Sometimes I found myself in strange towns, and penniless,
because I had heard that a miracle healer was coming from
overseas and he had an “impressive healing resume”.
After a while, I learned to accept my status and asked God to
use me the way I am. I was healed of one ill, though: foolishness. I
learned that God works on His own terms.
Most of the people who are on the outside looking in think
that if I’m somehow rid of this virus, I will have a ‘normal’ life.
What they don’t know is I’m actually living a normal life right
now. HIV may have grabbed hold of a part of my immunity, but
I’m still in life’s driving seat. And that’s what is important.
I do need miracles in my life, just not the ones people think.
For instance, could someone please pray that we would see an
end to the bottlenecks that sometimes mean people who are
living with HIV have a hard time accessing treatment?
I also wish someone would pray and move the mountain that
is the relevant authorities so that they can put their money
where their mouth is, especially with regards to basic things that
mean life and death for women and children living with HIV.
I’m not done yet: I wish all Christians would practise what
they preach because, there are thousands of bed-ridden folks
who will die unless someone – read, that church-going Christian
neighbour – gets to them on time with a mug of porridge, or
even just a shoulder to lean on. Those are the miracles I need to
see working in my life.
asuntawagura@hotmail.com
LIVING POSITIVELY
This is the diary of Asunta Wagura, a mother of two who
tested positive 20 years ago. She is the executive director of
the Kenya Network of Women with Aids (KENWA).