Wednesday November 19, 2008

Boys become increasingly vulnerable
In the last few months, children’s rights organisations have cited an
increase in sexual abuse against boys, writes MILLICENT MWOLOLO.

Thirteen year-old Hassan is
a Standard Four pupil at
Shangilia Mtoto wa Afrika, a
rescue centre for vulnerable
and abused children. The tall,
shy, light-skinned boy, who is an orphan,
originally comes from Marsabit. But
he left home about four years ago and
hasn’t been back. When schools close
for the holidays, he says, he goes to
visit his friends, David and BJ, who live
in Langata, Nairobi. The couple have a
daughter who is a bit older than him. He
says they have all made him feel like part
of their family.
Hassan has just sat for a written test
and come fourth in a class of nine. But
behind his smiling demeanour is a bitter
past that he cannot erase. When he was
nine years old, Hassan was sexually
assaulted by a schoolmate at a day school
in Marsabit. David and BJ, missionariescum-
veterinary doctors, came to his
rescue and connected him to Shangilia
Mtoto wa Afrika.
His case is one among an alarmingly
increasing number. “We are now
witnessing an increase in the number
of sexual abuse cases against boys in
the form of sodomy,” says Irene Nyamu,
the director of Childline Kenya, an
organization that runs a helpline for
children in distress.
Other ways in which boys are being
abused, she adds, is through exposure
to pornography. “This is happening in
the video dens that have mushroomed in
most of our informal settlements – Kibera
and Kayole are the most affected by this
form of abuse.”
Irene laments that young boys are
being drugged and then abused by young
and middle-aged men most of whom are
idle and waylay the children as they walk
to and from school.
At Shangilia Mtoto wa Afrika, Japheth
Njenga the centre’s director, says they
have rescued more boys from the streets
in the past one year than ever before.
“There are more boys than there are
girls on the streets,” he says, adding that
this disparity means that boys are being
abused more at home.
Speaking on sodomy, Brian Weke, a
programme manager on child rights
awareness at the Child Rights Advisory
Documentation and Legal Centre
(Cradle) confirms that the incidents of
sexual abuse on boys have increased in
the past few months. “We have received
a good number of sodomy cases from
schools and other institutions, and even
rehabilitation centres. In the past week,
for instance, we have handled two cases,
something that was not happening
before,” says Brian.
The centre received the case of a 10-
year-old boy who had been sodomised
by a fellow student. “There are especially
a lot of sodomy cases that we’re getting
from the Eastlands areas of Bahati,
Jericho, Pumwani and Shauri Moyo,”
he says. “An on-going street children
rehabilitation programme in the area has
a lot to do with this, as it has brought very
many of them together,” Brian explains.
A few weekends ago, both Cradle and
Childline Kenya held a four-day football
tournament that was dubbed “Kick Child
Abuse out of Eastlands”, which brought
together up to 10,000 children in Bahati.
“The children, together with the local
community, were sensitised on the ongoing
sexual violence, how to protect
themselves from abuse and where to seek
help when it happens,” Brian explains.
He is of the opinion that civil society
organisations have cracked the whip
on people who abuse girls so often and
hard that the result has been that childabusers
have shifted their unwelcome
attention to boys.
Japheth cites the increase in poverty
levels among the urban and rural
population as a key contributing factor
to boys running to the streets from where
they are more open to sexual abuse. He
says that many children find themselves
on the streets in search of a better option.
“This is due to the harshness of some
parents towards their children,” he says.
To some extent, boys tend to be more
rebellious than girls and when this
happens, if they have no one else to run,
boys opt for the streets. “In addition, the
lack of adult household heads has given
way to child-headed families, creating
difficult home situations” he adds.
While on the streets, boys and girls
have different methods of survival. “Girls
beg and engage in child prostitution
before they graduate into professional
prostitutes. Boys beg and also snatch
other people’s property – wallets,
handbags and so on – before graduating
into hardcore criminals,” says Njenga.
If there are no measures taken to rescue
children from the streets, the crime and
prostitution rate already being practiced
in the society will soar. “The implications
would be premature deaths from drug
abuse, police shootings and HIV and
Aids. Our future would be going to
waste as we stand to lose a generation
that would have given back to society,”
Njenga explains.
He feels that the military style of getting
children off the streets is nothing short of
inhuman. “Instead, we should as a society
begin by finding out why the children,
and more so an increasing number of
boys, are running to the streets. This
would be a labour-intensive exercise as
it would involve counselling and social
work, but at least, it is somewhere to
begin,” he says.
He adds that the government should
send social workers to the streets to
interact with these children, understand
where they are coming from and
implement individual solutions.
At Shangilia Mtoto wa Afrika, the
number of girls now stands at 100,
while the boys number 129. The Child
Helpline director says over the last
three months, they, together with the
Children’s Department, have handled
over 300 child abuse cases; close to 10
per cent of the children are boys. “This is
a rare occurrence compared to the past,”
explains Irene.
To curb sexual criminal perpetration
on boys, Brian says the government, child
rights organisations and the civil society
should raise awareness on what the law
says about sodomy in order to sensitise
the public. After all, the Sexual Offences
Act addresses both genders.
“For anyone to engage in sexual
activity – whether with consent or not
– with anyone under 18 years of age is
an offence,” he says. The penalties differ
according to the age of the person under
assault.
“If the sexually abused person is below
11 years, the culprit is to be given a life
sentence. If the child is aged between 11
and 15 years, the culprit is to be jailed for
not less than 20 years. If the child is aged
between 15 and 18 years, the offender
is subject to an 18-year imprisonment,”
Brian explains, adding that this applies to
both a male and a female child.
mmwololo@nation.co.ke