Sunday Nation, November 26, 2000

Left: French Ambassador Pierre Jacquemot with his wife Catherine at the envoy's
residence in Woodley, Nairobi. Above is their daughter Eleonore, 18, taking part in
the French horse-racing national championships in Paris. (Pictures from the family
album and by YUSUF WACHIRA)


is biased for charities and NGOs.
Catherine, his wife of 33 years, is a biolo-
gist researching Aids remedies at the famous
Pasteur Institute in Paris. Catherine has
always worked and lived in Paris, vacation-
ing to stay with her husband during limited
periods, but she will soon be coming to do
her work in Kenya "so the benefits of my
research may help many people who are
directly affected by the HIV scourge in East
Africa."
She came to visit Pierre after he had been
sent for his tour of duty in Nairobi but stayed
for only two weeks before going back to
. Paris.
For Pierre, as for his wife and children, the
thrill of riding a horse casts an irresistible
'spell on his mind and he's creative on the
horseback. Very much the way the image of
Africa binds his heart and mind.
"I'm particularly fond of dressage. It's like
dancing with the horse. You try to make
what you want with the horse. It's very
inspiring and interesting," says the ambassa-
dor pacing up and down the luxurious lawns
on his compound, with his wife by his side
and their ll-year-old dog, Baobab, from
Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso, playing around
the couple.
Pierre goes to the races every time an
opportunity presents itself
"I'm a horse rider - don't try in some
matter to put the cart a long way before the
horse. Let us raise our glasses to the Franco-
Kenyan friendship," Pierre said during a
Press reception held at the French Cultural
Centre in Nairobi on October 25.
Catherine, too, is a keen rider. But for
Eleanore it's not just a hobby. It's serious
sport, and she takes part in the French
o-     national championships.
Much as he loves horse-riding, the ambas-
sador puts diplomacy first, Kenya first,
Africa first.
He has worked in Africa since 1970-71,
during which period he was the deputy direc-
tor of studies at the National School of
Administration in Dakar.

From 1972 to 1974, Pierre was a professor
