NAILY NATION, WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 29,2000

Spread of killer Aids blamed on Alcoholism,

By EDMUND KWENA

Alcoholism is one of the main contiributors to
the spread ofthe dreaded HlV/AidS scourge,
the chairman of the Mombasa branfh of the
Kenya National Chamber of C.ommerce and
Industry, Mr Najib Balala has said.'

He said he agreed with a recent newspaperarticle that said alcoholism clouded, the mind,
killed any sense of judgment and hampered
decision-making.                       '
Mr Balala said this in a speech read for hi
by the branch secretary, Mr Alexander
Mwangeka, during a well-attended anti-Aids

Campaign rally at Mwabungo in Kwale District
concurred that alcohol abuserand took unnecessary risks.

"Young people gathered here today, I want
you to stop and think how many times alcohol has led you to hastily-negotiated rendezvous at which you never remembered untill that you should have taken preqautions,

Najib Balala posed.Saying that HIV/Aids was a complex issue, Mr Balala promised to contribute towards the
fight against the scourge by working closely with institutions such Africa Alive which organised the event.

He said slogan shouting or exhibitionist

"posturing were not solutions to problems

Aids. However, he said education, capacity

for goodwill, vision for the future and adapt
ing to change would go along way to curb the

spread of the killer disease.

"History will bear me witness that pnly
those Individuals whose capacity for seeing

beyond themselves and beyond their immedi-

ate selfish interests have made a mark in his-

tory," Mr Balala said and praised the otganis- .

ers of the event describing it as a real

eye-opener in the fight against the scourge.


The chairman of the Keny~ chapter of

Africa Alive, an initiative of the Johns Hop-
kins University of the United'States, Ms Tina

Dyrssen, said the event marked the official


m launch of the chapter in Kenya ..
She said Africa Alive initiative aimed to

preveJ;ltthe spread of HIV/Aids among young


people in Africa where the epidemic had


already had a staggering toll.


"Young people in their reproductive years

comprise the largest segment of the African

population and studies have shown that more

than half of the HIV /Aids victims were under
25 years of age," Ms Dyrssen told the gather-
ing.

She said most people in the province
"
wrongly associated HIV/Aids with tourists

and a few' individuals from distant lands.
Many of them, she said, vehemently denied

the possibility of the e'Xistence of the disease

among them and believed that they were pro-

tected by their gods ..

The infection is sky-rocketing in the region

with statistics showing that at least 30 per

-cent of all patients treated in government hos-

pitals 'were HIV positive.
-
"It is already causing havoc .. s scores con-
a

tinue to die," she said.

The occasion whose thymt( ~as tushauri-
ease problems at the hospital which lacked
incubators as babies born prematurely were

taken care of in open makeshift incubators
which are heated manually ..
The M.o.H·advised the donors to channel

their assistance through the ministry, because

it was not easy for institutions to seek tax

exemption for such donations.             '.

"It is only from that point that we can :;tart


to process delivery of the equipment," said Dr

Anisa during a discussion with Mr Ednard

Johnson and the wife Shirley who toured the
hospital and donated medical supplies worth

more than Sh60,000.
The two British tourists donated an ambu-


lance worth Sh2.5 million to the Malindi

Community a few years ago.
