Sunday Nation, December 31, 2000

YEAR TO END FIRST

diplomatic nature of the tragedy.
When Information, Transport and Communications
Minister Musalia Mudavadi faced CNN
cameras to tell the world about the accident, his
was the face of a man who understood that when
your national flag carrier crashes, you owe the
world at least the information, if not an
explanation.
This rapid response reflex was also seen when
a Kenya Railways train exploded into flames
causing death and injuries in Athi River.
Among the first at the scene for the rescue was
Mr Titus Naikuni, the Transport and Communications
Permanent Secretary. Also there promptly
were Police Commissioner Philemon Abong'o,
the KR Managing Director Douglas Odette and a
director of operations at police headquarters, Mr
John Onono .
Firefighters from the Kenya Army, Kenya Air
Force and City Council came to the scene.
Kenyans seem to have learnt a lot from the
terrorist bomb that struck Nairobi in August,
1998. Authorities seem to be getting the cue that
they owe Kenyans an .explanation and some apo]-
ogy when crises strike.
That was not always the case in the past. When
the 1998 bomb went off, the government reacted
by dispatching the Genera] Service Unit and
Police to the scene. No one thought that counse]-
lors and information would be needed. Traditionally,
government officials would maintain a tight
silence, with an explanation that only the minister
could talk.
That minister or manager would conveniently
be "out" even when in. The authorities saw the
US take care of its citizens at the bombed embassy.
Kenyans read discrimination. The fact is, US
embassy officials understood that a government's
first duty is to its citizens. Kenyans have learnt.
Death came closer home when Ebola struck in
Uganda as the year neared its end. There was fear
that the malady may cross over to Kenya. The
Ministry of Health was seen to be concerned and.
did screen people at the border.
The danger may not be over yet. But there is a
feeling that the government tried. The climax was
the expulsion of 137 Ugandans who had been
booked in at the Nairobi Safari Club, where they
were' holding a politica] conference. The government
feared they could have been carriers of the
disease.
Some people described the eviction as callous.
After all, Ugandans are our neighbours. However,
Health Minister Amukowa Anangwe was
right. The government's first duty is to its
citizens. That learning has tied well with the emergence
of parliamentary committees seen
to be acting directly on behalf of the
citizens.
When Kenyan soldiers were hemmed
in in Sierra Leone, the parliamentary Defence
Committee marched to the West African country
to get first-hand information. In Parliament,
numerous MPs wanted a statement on the safety
of Kenyans in Sierra Leone.
Some people questioned the logic behind send- -
ing MPs to the battleground at the expense of
taxpayers. But it is what other countries do. Congressional
committees are so powerful in the US
.that they can stop what a President would allow if
they consider it inappropriate. Last year, Senator
Jesse He]ms told the UN that the US might pull
out of the international body if members kept
pressing the country to pay its debt.
Sen Helms was speaking as the chairman of
the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations. Earlier
last year, he stopped USAid from giving
money to West African countries that wanted to
control flow of small firearms even though President
Clinton had approved the assistance.
Parliamentary committees, where they work,
point to a healthier watchdog role by Parliament.
It is something that emerged strongly this year.
Kenyans have reason to hope that it continues.
Kenyan authorities did away with red tape
after the plane crash. They were annoyed when
they met that bureaucracy in Abidjan. We can
take pride in the knowledge that the tragedies
have pushed us into responding to emergencies in
the internationally acceptable manner.
There were fears that Kenya might descend
into Zimbabwe-style land takeover chaos when
the year began. Western media predicted that and
loca] politicians urged Kenyans to do it. It failed,
an indication that Kenyans understand that they
have a unique position in Africa and do not bow
to every whim.
"Peace is a central variable in predicting the
future. We may see it as political rhetoric but it is
a requirement that Kenyans should not take for
granted," said Mr Po]ycarp Ochilo, a lecturer at
the University of Nairobi and a regular traveller
to foreign destinations.
Sailing through the chaos in Zimbabwe and
other neighbouring countries marked another
Kenyans' commitment to remaining within the
paths of the rule of law.
"We have lots of prob]ems," Mr Ochilo says,
"but we are not the worst of the African lot. He
pointed out that even with damaged infrastructure
and lowest economic performance, Kenyans have
never missed their salaries, even this dying year
which is regarded as one of the hardest Kenyans
have faced."
"Of course we can do better. But the trials of
this year have shoWn a unique resilience of Kenyans.
We have reason to hope for the best."
Mr Ochi]o, the President of the African Counci]
for Communication Education, mentions the
expansion of the media as a great achievement
this year. He says it is an indication that there
could be an expansion of the democratic space
that comes with a libera]ised media market. .
"Libera] media is necessary in a democracy.
The Iiberalisation of airwaves is, therefore, an
achievement journalists cannot ignore."
"In our low and beaten moods, we often fail to
recognise what we should congratulate ourselves
for," Mr Ochi]o said.
This year, a Kenyan doctor, Mr Fabian Mwanyumba,
was _among the -only three scientists
awarded the Young Investigators Award at the
]3th World Aids Conference.
Dr Mwanyumba was recognised for his studies
on mother-to-child transmission of HIV.
His studies sought to identify the exact stage at
which most HIV -positive mothers infect their
babies. And to think that the research was done at
the Coast General Hospital, - one of the many
much-maligned health institutions in Kenya,
could be another indication that we need to
appreciate what we have.
Dr Mwanyumba's achievement did not get
much publicity at home. He was no politician.
But it is another indication that despite the very
hard times the nation is going through, other
nations, more so our neighbours, have a lot of
catching up to do.
The World Bank and the Internationa] Monetary
Fund aid may not be everything. But the fact
that the donors renewed their engagement with
Kenya after nine years is a triumph to count in
2000. The resumption is a reminder that at times,
we suffer needlessly. The government always
knew what was to be done. And there were
always people who could do it. But we chose not
to do so and suffered for it.
Save for President Moi's promised surprises,
the big events of 2000 are over.