DECEMBER 13,2000

AIDS SPREAD CAUSES GRAVE CONCERN

By WALKER MWANDOTO
More than 50 per cent of all th patients
admitted to the Kilifi Distnct Hospital
suffered from Aids, the acting local med
¡cal officer of health. Dr Heltøn K. Julo,
has said. ,
The number of victims in private
health facilities and at home was uknown
as these were not reported, he said.
Dr J jIb said an average of three
patients died every month due to Aids at
(he hospital and many more deaths went
unreported in the villages.
Addressing wananchi at the Kilifi
sports-ground during the World Aids Day
whioch was marked with drama, poems,
songs and dance focusing on the scourge,
the officer said “IIIV/Aids is spreading at
an alarming raie in the district as an aver
age of 10 new cases are confirmed at the
district hospital cvcry month,” Dr Jillo
said. He said HIV prevalence raie in the
disirict stands at 12 per cent and thai
most of those infected were aged between
25 and 40 years.
Dr hilo urged the use of drama, poetry
and traditional dance to enlighten
wananchi on the dangers and repercu
sions of contracting the killer disease.
He expressed concern that many locals
thought that Aids was a myth or that if it
existed it only affected foreigners as the
locals claimed immunity through the pro
tection of their gods.
Kikambala DO Mrs Asha Kiiva who
represented Kilifi DC Moses Wandiema
said there was need lo intensify the fight
against he killer infection in the area.
Noting that the theme of this year’s
World Aids Day which is marked on
Deciiber I was Men Can Make A Differ
ence, she urged males to use condoms.
Mrs Kiiva who addressed the gathering
after reading the speech from Minister of
State Maj (rtd) Marsden Madoka said
youth were mostly affected by the disease
because they refused to use condoms.
The administrator told the Mijikenda
community to abandon the outdated tra
ditional €ulturc of inheriting widows cau
ìoning them that the practice fanned the
spread of the scourge in the area.
She urged people who were HIV posi
tive to become role models in a bid to
curb the spread of the disease by educat
ing the public on the dangers of engaging
in casual sex.
The district co-ordinator of Hl V/Aids
and Sexually Transmitted Infections, Mr
Maurice Obuya, said more than 63,000
persons were HIV positive in the district.
Mr Obuya said a survey had indicated
thai over 100 people treated in the local
clinics per month had sexually transmit
ted infections.
He expressed concern that although
there were ST) drugs in all government
health facililics in the district, most
patients preferred going to private clinics
for treatlylent.
“The disease is spreading at an alarm
ing rate in the district because the major
ity of men keep concubines,” he said;
Clir Stephen Chombo of Kilifi Town
council who represented the local author-
ity chairman, Mr Hamid Mubarak said
many girls had dropped Out of school in
the area to engage in commercial sex due
to poverty and risked contracting the
killer disease.
ClIr Chombo blamed over indulgence
in the consumption of palm wine among
men and women as one of the ways
which fanned the spread of the scourge
because most people became loose on
getting drunk and engaged in indiscrimi
nate sex.
Expressing concern that many children
had been orphaned by Aids, he chal
lenged religious organisations and NCJOS
operating in the district to assist the local
authority establish a home to take care of
such children in the area.
CllrChombo thanked the Kilifi Dis
trict Development Programme funded by
Germany through the German Technical
Agency, GTZ, for financing the cam
paign to fight HIV/Aids in the district
and urged other organisations to emulate
It.