SATURDAY AUGUST 5, 2000
EDITORS NOTE

This week, a landmark precedent was set in our
l courts. A ruling in which a judge had allowed a husband to
I throw his HIV-positive wife out of the marital home
II (notWithstanding the fact that his own HIV status is
unknown) was overturned in the Court of Appeal. Let's
ignore, for the moment, the n.egat.ive impact this action
would have had on an otherwise healthy woman with two
little children still dependent on her. Let's look at the
insensitivity of High Court Lady Justice Rawal's decision.
The fact is, if one spouse is HIV positive, the chances
are substantially increased that the other spouse may also
test positive for the virus. For a husband to throw his wife
out on these grounds is akin to throwing stones at your
neighbour from inside a glasshouse. And for the judiciary
to sanction such a negative, hateful, almostsE!~I~t
judgement is morally offensive. Perhaps Lady JpstiCe
Rawal thought she was doing the right thin~bYiJhe
husband and the children; that byisolatihgthe~~spand
and children from the 'soiledl11ember' oftheP?I,I~.ehold,
they would run lesser risk of being infected.' Pertll1 y
Justice Rawal needs a little more education onHI
transmission. f
Indeed, many of us do not understapdHIV~I'l~Aigs.
Because of this ignorance, HIV/Aids has become a
political issue, rather than a persona.l,imorala . th
issue, And it is primarily beca.useof this politiq g that
individuals suffer and succumb faster than they should to
these dreaded phenomena.
Which brings me to my next point; a HIV-positive
patient is not doomed to die of Aids and is, is many cases,
a very healthy, vital being. However under situations of
undue stress and unhappiness, the onset of Akis may be
acce4erated; for the sake of their cNldren, at the very least,
Mr ‘l-am-not-HIV-positive-too’ should have thought of this.
The woman in question deserves alt the support she
can get from us. Often, when faced with such a situation,
it’s difficult enough to muster the strength to fight back.
fl,9 )as chosen to fight for her rights and not sit back
nsffpšty is laudable. This is an eye-opener for many who
‘may be suffering silently. Now they know that they can
stand up and fight this kind of injustice. Her lawyer, Abida
Ali-Aroni and the three Court of Appeal judges also
deserves a mention. The law must have a human face if
we are to believe in it’s supremacy.
Rhoda Orengo