AUGUST 20, 2000
BY MWAKERA MWAJEFA

BigMama struts across the school compound in a
flashy manner that attracts a young man. Moments
later, the boy finds himself in an exclusive beach
hotel rubbing shoulders with the rich and mighty.
Under this "magical spell", he finds himself on a divan
bed with Big Mama, who introduces him to a fantasy world
he had no idea about.
Seconds later, Big Mama extends a thick envelope to
the sheepish boy in which she has stashed Sh20,000. In it is
also a small note saying: "You have become a member of
the exclusive club. Welcome and use the money to buy
yourself a coffin. Bye....
This and more is what members of the Tononoka Youth
Development Group (TYDG),had for the Mombasa public
recently.
Titled "Big Mama", the play' eaches youth to refrain
from indiscriminate sex because it could lead to death.
With the Aids/HIV scourge ti Iking its toll, the TYDG
fears that unless youth are educllted about the problem,
they will all fall prey to it.
Started early this year, TYDG has 20 members who are
using open-air theatre to help figllt the life-threatening ills in
society.
Idleness and lack of employ~"ent are leading youth to
drug abuse, alcoholism, smoking commercial sex and
crime.
The group's treasurer, Peter Cchieng, says the youth are
succumbing to drugs, alcohol anI I the Aids scourge.
"Our aim is to keep ourselves busy, now that
employment opportunities have b ~come rare," Peter adds.
The group is also engaged in clea n-up campaigns.
During the August 12 open-ail show at Tononoka
grounds, TYDG used concerts, pu ns, poems, speeches and
plays to create awareness on dru~'S and Aids.
Through the poem 'Aids - The:Killer' by Esther Mweni,
19, the public was cautioned to b( careful about their sex
lives while "Enough is Enough" by Anna Nyange, 17, talks of
coming to grips with the reality th\ ft indiscriminate sex is not
safe. '
Nicholas Wanjogu and Tina R,Iphael, in a Kiswahili
piece 'Ukimwi Kinywa Kipana', sheIW how Aids is deadly,
while Tina's solo verse 'Moshi,' warns against indulging in
smoking.
Another play, 'Jihadhari na Madawa ya Kulevya,'
emphasises the need to avoid dru~s as they also influence
rowdy behaviour ,
Peter says they need statione,
1
" costumes and a proper
venue for their rehearsals in order 0 improve their
performances,. I
The group is app~aling for ass; ltance from individuals,
well-wishers and non-governmenta I organisations to come
to their aid. The group also plans t(· perform plays based
on secondary schools set books in order to raise funds.