The Sunday'Nation, June 18,2000

AIDS VIRUS MAY HAVE RESULTED FROM A 1950S POLIO VACCINE

By DENNIS ONYANGO
A merican and European scientists are get
ting back to their labs to test a vaccine
developed more than 40 years ago, that
sorne say could have been the source of
the now unmanageable Aids.
Grudgingly, the scientists will conduct tests in
three laboratories to determine if an experimental
oral polio vaccine administered in 1957 could have
carried the virus that led to Aids. Results are
expected soon.
Vjstar Institute, a research centre in Philadel
phia, United States, manufactured the vaccine in
the 1950s and kept in frozen form a sample of the
material used. That sample will now be used to test
a theory some American newspapers say is “im
probable” and some doctors call “far-fetched.”
Sceptics long charged that the oral polio vaccine
tried in the then Belgian Congo in the l950s was
possibly made with chimpanzee tissue that might
have been contaminated with the ancestor of the
Aids virus.
Now, under pressure. Wistar is sponsoring scien
tists back to the laboratories hoping to prove there
is no truth in the claims. But scientists also say that
some hell could break loose should it be proved
thai chimpanzee tissue was used.
America’s Centre for Disease Control and Pre
vention however says finding the chimpanzee
DNA will not prove that the vaccine carried virus
es. The theory will have been proved if the scien
tists find an Aids-like virus in the samples.
There are other complications. Scientists say that
the virus could still be there even if the tesis do not
detect it.
There has been some simmering row about thai
vaccine for close to 40 years now. The concerns
became more pronounced in early 1992 following a
story ifl Rolling Stone magazine that also
demanded the tests be conducted.
In an article published on March 19, 1992, titled
“Origins of Aids,” the magazine suggested that tri
als of a live polio virus vaccine in present-day
Congo possibly caused Aids.
Assembling details that sounded as logical as
one could probably get then, the magazine argued
that the vaccine was grown in primary monkey
kidney cell cultures. It said contamination of these
cultures could have led to inadvertent inoculation
of Aids virus.
The pressure forced the Wistar Institute to
appoint an independent Committee of scientists to
Investigate the concerns. The committee of six
doubted that there was any truth in the claims. Still,
it recommended that the vaccine be tested.
The committee also recommended that the ori
gins of the monkey kidneys used for growing the
vaccines be made clear because it mattered.
Asian monkeys were said to be free of Aids-
related viruses, unlike the African monkeys. Even
today, the committee said, African Green monkey
kidneys are still used to prepare the polio vaccine.
The team observed that at the time of the polio
vaccine’s preparation, the Jndian government had
put an embargo on all monkey exports. This
increased the chances that African monkeys were
used.
Wistar was reluctant to implement the Commit
tee’s recommendations citing lack of scientific
interest. Only the US Centre for Disease Control
and Prevention was ready to conduct the tests, yet
the tests required more than one lab for control
findings.
But greater pressure came in late last year when
a British journalist published a book that resur
rected demands for the testing of the vaccine. The
BBC correspondent, who is also a former UN offi
cial, raised some hard questions on the rise of Aids.
J n The River: A Journey ro ¡he Source of H!V
and Aids, (Little Brown, September 1999),
Edward Hooper examined the scientific activi
ties of one American and one Belgian doctor
in the modem-day Congo, Rwanda and Burundi in
the mid 1950s.
He traced some of the earlier blood samples col
lected from patients .in the Central Africa region
and taken to American and Belgian laboratories.
The writer also examined some three deaths that
occurred in three separate places: George Y. ‘s
death in Toronto, David Carr’s in Manchester and
Ardouin A.’s in New York in 1959. He says these
could be the earliest Aids-related deaths.
He talked to the doctors and hospital assistants
who handled the patients. In some cases, he looked
at the autopsy reports on these patients; I-looper
gathered evidence -of similar medical complications
in the three cases and the fact that their doctors did
not know exactly the causes of the complications
and eventual death. Quoting obituaries and
exchanges between Albert Sabin and Hilary
Koprowski. two doctors who were centrally
involved in the development and administration of
the oral polio vaccine, I looper established titar at
sorne stage, Sabin got more concerned about Aids
even as he concentrated his efforts on polio.
In an article published in Nature magazine two
weeks after his death, Sabin argued that attempts to
vaccinate against Aids would not succeed. Accord
ing to Hooper, both doctors had developed their
own sets of oral polio vaccines. The US was about
to approve either Sabin’s or Koprowski’s.
The writer says that stakes were getting higher.
Whichever vaccine the US approved was likely to
be adopted globally. Referring to the proceedings at
the First International Conference on Live Poliovi
rus Vaccines, Hooper quotes Dr Sabin saying that
his rival’s vaccine, which had been fed to about
300,000 people in Congo, had been contaminated
with a virus that had nothing to do with polio.
He quotes Dr Sabin as sayin that the vaccine
killed cells when introduced into monkeys. A
Swedish virologist came to Koprowski’s defence.
Before this confrontation, Hooper says, Sabin had
published the same concerns in the British Medi
cal Journal.
A section of the obituary quoted in (he book
recognises that the question of selection of polio-
virus to be used in human beings strained the rela
tionship between the two pioneer polio doctors.
But at the end, the obituary quoted Dr Sabin
Writing to his rival that speculations that Aids
began with the polio virus were irresponsible, giv
ing the impression that before he died, he had rec
onciled with Koprowski.
In 1992, Rolling Stone argued that Dr Sabin’s
vaccine had been used in Eastern Europe in sugar
cubes unlike Dr Koprowski’s that was distributed
in Central Africa in its more or less raw nature.
These differences, the magazine argued, could
explain why earlier cases of Aids are traced to
Africa and not Europe.
Scientists however contend the exercise would
be futile because it is not certain that what is to be
tested is a truc sample of what was given to the
people of Congo. In his book, Hooper says the
vaccine’s experiment in Africa had terrible and
tragic consequences.
Wistar Institute dispatched the polio vaccine to
an independent laboratory that will divide it
between three or four other laboratories. The vac
cine will be hand delivered to the participating lab
oratories in April.
Researchers will be looking for an Aids-related
virus in the animal tissue used in the vaccine.
According to a report in The New York Times,
scientists have retrieved I-11V from blood that had
been stored tòr decades. That indicates they could
produce reliable results using the stored vaccine.
But a lot depends on the quality of the stored
material.
Laboratories ran by the US Government arc
barred from conducting the test, so are laboratories
based in Philadelphia. [tooper’s book is (he most
systematic but diplomatic attack on medical experts
arid scientists for refusing to test the theory that
their activities may have caused the most devastat
ing disease in the history of mankind.
Scientists have long agreed that 1-11V is a
descendant of an SIV virus carried by African chim
panzees. Hooper agrees with this.
B ut he differs with thc scientists on how this
virus jumped from chimpanzees to
humans. Some scientists have said it was a
natural transfer through human-
chimpanzee contacts. Some have suggested that
some Africans kept chimpanzees for pets. Others
say the virus spread when people hunted and
skinned chimpanzees for food.
The scientists argue . that Aids spread only
recently because of changes in Africa involving
migrations resulting from the Second World War
and the end of colonialism. Using maps, I-looper
establishes very close links between the I 950s’ vac
cinations and early Aids.
Even as scientists get back to the laboratories,
another group that claims that H1V does not cause
Aids is forcing its way into high places, posing
another challenge to the conventional Aids wisdom.
The Aids debate is also becoming more political.
Some University of California professors have
maintained that there is no link between HIV and
Aids. Charles Gcshcktcr, professor of African His
tory, David Rasnick a biochemist and Peter Ducs- .
berg, professor of biochemistry and molecular biol
ogy support this theory. They say Aids is caused by
recreational drug use and malnutrition.
