DAILY NATION WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 6,2000


By EDMUND KWENA TUSHAURIANE DRIVE TO ENLIGHTEN

By EDMUND KWENA
T hey came on foot, on bicycles and
in hired vehicles. They came from
far and,wide and children as
young as three years to the octo
genarians, wereall there as the football
pitch at Mwabungo in Kwale District sud
denly turned into a giant dance floor when
a taraab music group from Mombasa
Mombasa started belting out melodious tunes.
As early as 8am, the crowd had started to swell and the Kenya chapter of Africa
Alive who had prganised the event, were
overwhelmed by the big response to the
publicity they had carried Qut prior to the
event. I
The organisers had taken advantage of
the fact that the local communities are avid
lovers oftaraal:t music and football so they
ensured that this was not in shon supply on
this sunny Sunclay.
They had fe~red that the event might fail
because it was being held in an area
mainly inhabiteo by conservative M!.Islims,
but at the end Qfthe day they were relieved
because religiop did not inhibit the people
from turning o~t for the event that educated
the peopl¢ on the dangers of HIV/
Aids.
Information tents erected around the.
pitch were parked to capacity with people
eager to hear aqout the scourge which .
according the local community is only
contracted by tburists and outsiders. '
. By the end ofthe day, at least 10,000
condoms had b~en given out to the enthusiastic
crowd. i' ...
The event dll,bbed Tushauriane (lets
talk) marked tl1eofficial launch in Kenya
of Africa Alive~ an anti-Aids lobby group
initiated by the;Johns Hopkins University
in the United States.
'The initiativ~ recognises the fact that·
young people i* their reproductive years
comprise the I~rgest segment of the African
population;yet more than half of HIV
infections occurred among those under 25
years of age.;, '
Africa Alive aims at preventing the
spread ofthe disease among youtl~ in
Africa where die epidemic has already
taken a heavy t!J1Ion this group.
The disease also remains one of the
main sources df suffering, isolation, disi\-
Jusionment, po;Vertyand death in the continent.
,
It is also the'major cause of numerous
social, political' and even economic
upheavals to individuals an nations
Inspite of the economic public a\vare~
ness with regard to the epidemic, statistics
indicate that th'e killer is spreading at an
alarming rate iil Kenya. Health workers'
attribute this to' lack of focus in the fight
against the disease that is threatening the
very foundatio~ of mankind .. AfriCa •.Alive is calling for change
" - in people's behaviour and
'breaking the walls of denial to •
be their main focus, said Africa
Alive ~enya chairperson, Ms Tina Dyrssen.
The launch of the Kenya Chapter in .
Kwale District ..w•.as therefore befitting and1.·....timely as it came in the backdrop of disturbing
reports that cases ofHIV/Aids '~.
~ cases in the region now sto0el at at 25 per '
cent and 15 in the more cosmop.olitan
Mombasa ...
The local communities deny the existence
of the disease among them. They
believe they aFe protected by their gods
and put a lot of faith in their morals.
. But the truth on the ground is is far from
what they believe or say. HIV infection in
the area is skyrocketing and health workers
say that at least 30 per cent of all patients
treated in government institutions were
HIV positive .. ' ..
The chief g~est at the event, the chairman
ofthe' Kenya National Chamber of
Commerce and Industry, Mombasabranch,
Mr Najib Balala,'who was represented by
the branch secretary, Mr Alexander
l\1,Wangeka,sa"d alcoholism was one of the
major contribu,tors to the high spread of