DAILY NATION, WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 1,2000

FIGHT AGAINST AIDS STEPPED UP TO CURB SPREAD
'14 PERCENT HIV POSITIVE IN THE PROVINCE'

By NGUMBAO KITHI
One in every six people in Coast
Province is HIV positive, the
chairman ofthe National Aids
Control Council, Dr Mohammed
Abdullah has said.
He said available statistics indicated that
the HIV /Aids prevalence rate in the region
stood at 14 per cent.
The fight against the scourge, he said,
rested with behaviour change and equipping
the vulnerable groups with all the
information on safe sex.
"The focus of our council is to protect
those not already infected and provide hope
for those who have succumbed to the disease,"
he said.
Dr Abdullah said the priority of the council
was to impart knowledge of the pandemic
to the most vulnemble members of
the society who included the youth and productive
members of the family.
He said the government was concerned
over the current situation where families
spent endless resources in care and support
those who were already living with HIV/
Aids.
Dr Abdullah made the remarks in a
speech read for him by the administrative
manager of the council, Mr Moses Maina,
during the launch of Likoni Constituency
_Aids Control Committee at the Bomani
grounds on Saturday afternoon.
Area MP Suleiman Shakombo, said the
community must address and discard the
myths associated with the disease and use
the elected constituency committee to learn
the latest about the pandemic.
He said that some of the ambitious programmes
the committee would address
included, wife inheritance and Mijikenda
beliefs that HIV/Aids was associated with
withcraft
He said Likoni constituency had elected
12 committee members who would work
closely with youth groups, social department
and the provincial administration to
reach out to all the people in the constituency.
Later, Mr Maina advised the local people
to stop polticising HIV/Aids problem and
seek all the information about it in order to
stay safe.
