                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  •
                                                                                  DAILY NATION, FRIDAY, DECEMBER I, 2000                                                                                                                                                                                     35
                                                                                                ~,';' ~:~.~.'.~' --
                                                                                                 ... .  ' .. '.'':'J~,'''~.
                                                                                                                       ..'")~~.''':"'J'\'''''-''.'''''''-~'":"."''''-''.''~-'-~.~'''''' ,.--- ..•.
                                                                                                                                            '                                    .:..•....      ---, •. -.-
                                                                                                                                                                                                      -       ..~-,.~ .. ..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    '  ~
            hy HIV/Aids Matters to Agriculture
.,-
     70-80 per cent of the population earn a living from agriculture,
     Agriculture contributes nearly 60 per cent of export earnings.                                                                                 Some ofNACC Members
 isheries, or agro-processing.
     Over 60 per cent of nation's food comes from subsistence farm-
 ng (mostly maize and grain legumes).
     Women perform over 80 per cent of agricultural labour.
    hy HlV/AIDS Matters to Agriculture and Rural Develop-
   ent
     HIV/Aids is already the leading killer among the productive
 egment (ages 15 to 45 years) of the Kenyan population
     Early exposure to HIV/Aids among women leading to early
  eaths usually by mid-twenties to early thirties
     The implication;s constrained labour for operations in agricul-
 ure, fisheries, and management of the co-operatives sector leading
 o low productivity
     Rural households driven further into poverty.
   IV/Aids and Development-Household          level
     Increased illness and death among farmers reduces productivity.
     Caring for the sick leaves less time for work, on or off the farm
- and costs, lots of money as resources are diverted to caring for                                                                      Prof Julius Meme Permanent                                                            Mr Z. K. Cheruiyot PS Provin-                    Mr John Munge Commissioner
                                                                           Dr Richard Leakey, Head of
   IV/Aids patients and funeral expenses.                                                                                               Secretary Ministry of Health                                                          cial Administration and Inter-                      General Kenya Revenue
                                                                                  Public Service
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       nal Security                                      Authority
   "We are spending more time turning the bodies of the sick than
  e are turning the soil."
    Annon.
HlV/Aids and Development-Household           level
    Since nearly all Kenyans depend on agriculture, HIV/Aids
 oses a serious threat to livelihoods                         '
    The hitherto dependable labour source for agriculture (mainly
  omen) is being lost
    Inability of community support systems to cope with increasing
 mmbers of Aids orphans
    Juveni]e rural urban migration culminating in escalation in the
 umber of street children and child prostitution ..
HlV/Aids and Development - Commercial Agriculture
     Escalation of operating expenses arising from increased medical
 nd funeral expenses
     Reduced productivity due to workers' absenteeism, sick-off and
funeral attendance                                                        Rev Mutava Musyimi Secretary                                   Prof Shem Migot Adhola, PS                                                           Dr Magaret Gachara, Director                     Amb Joshua K. Terer PS Office
     Loss of skilled personnel, training and experience resulting in       Gener'al National Council of                                   Ministry of Agriculture &                                                           National Aids Control Council                        of the Vice President
failing productivity in most agro-estates                                      Churches of Kenya                                              Rural Development                                                                & Seceretary to the council
• Falling profits because of cost escalation in the face of low pro-
ductivity implies loss of employment opportunities and liveli-
hoods.
productivity agro-estates failil]g profits because of es
HIV/AIDS and Development - Micro-economic level
    Fall in GDP since the, disease kills people in most productive
 ears reducing aggregate national savings rate
• Reduction in total income
Industrialisation through linkages to labour intensive agriculture
will not materialize
• Consequent]y, due to inadequate capital formation, next phase
 findustrialisation  (capital-intensive) will be impaired.
Current Situation in HIV/AIDS Control in MOARD
• Limited reaction so far to the impact ofHIV/Aids on MOARD
e   Little knowledge of impact ofHIV/Aids on MOARD staff and
normal operations. There are incidences of discrimination against                                                                        Mrs Zipporah Kittony Chair-                                                           Rt Rev John Njue, Chairman,
HIV/Aids sufferers.                                                        Mr J. J. Mugalla Cotu Secre-                                                                                                                                                                         Mr Allan G. Ragi Chairman/
                                                                                                                                             pertion Maendeleo ya                                                              Kenya Epis'copal Conference,                     Executive Director KANCO
                                                                                    tary General
• MOARD officials not fully aware of the magnitude of the                                                                                         Wananwake                                                                         Kenya Secretariat.
impact within communities where they work
• No systematic reporting on how different agricultural produc-
tion, systems are functioning in light ofHIV/Aids epidemic
• No new mechanisms, policies or programs have been developed
to anticipate impact of HIV/Aids on agriculture
Effects of HlV/Aids to MOARD as an organization. The status
of HlV/AIDS within the Ministry staff
• A substantial number of staff have lost at least one colleague
 lnd at least one close relative to Aids
 it 58 per cent of all deaths in the ministry in the last five years is
HIV /Aids related (estimates, December, 1999)
o Absenteeism     and unofficial leave are up.
o Workload     among staff has increased.
 Effects of HlV/Aids to MOARD as an organisation.
• Ministry is spending more on transport, funeral expenses, and
  -off,    reducing funds for service provision
• Staff productivity severaly compromised                                  Ms Rose Kimotho Managing                                             Mr Amos Wako, Attorney-                                                       Mr Martin L. Oduor-Otieno PS                      Dr Richard Muga, Director of
• Training and specialised experience is being lost                         Director Regional Reach                                                    General                                                                Ministry of Finance and Plan-                           Medical Services
• Institutional memory is being destroyed                                                                                                                                                                                             l1inl!;,Treasury
• Cost of replacing experience and training tremendous
      The Other Council Members
 '
   .The other members of the National Aids Con-
 '·trol Council not pictured are: Mr Chris Kirubi'
    immediate past Chairman Kenya Association
    of Manufacturers, Ms Dorothy Onyango
    WOF AK.,and Mr Hirji Shah immediate past
    chairman of Federation of Kenya Employers.                                                                                                                                                                                 Prof M. Mugambi, Vice Chan-                     Ms Inviolata Mmbwavi, Coun-
                                                                            Dr James Nyikal Chairman                                    Prof Abdul Ghafur Albusiady,                                                            cellor, Kenya Methodist Uni-                            cil Member
                                                                            K~nya Medical Association                                        Chairman SUPKEM                                                                                versity
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ·r..~:..,t.r~1 P.~l: J. 'r.1 '·.r.r '.t:"~-:1"
Page 


-------------------Trial Version-----------------------

Convert PDF to Text Desktop Software.

Copyright Convertpdftotext.net 2014.

To remove these lines, please activate your software from http://www.convertpdftotext.net/buynow.htm

-------------------------------------------------------
