DAILY NATION Wednesday December 9, 2009

By JOY WANJA

Tara-Klamp reduces
cross infection from
circumciser to one
being circumcised

By JOY WANJA
Mr Gibon Ogada, 46, has every
reason to smile. His son has
just undergone a safe and
painless circumcision.
Eleven-year-old Job Ochieng’ used a
new sterilised tool, now in the pharmaceutical
market.
“I looked for an option that involved no
open wounds, and had a shorter healing
period, so he could return to playing as
soon as possible,” Mr Ogada told the Nation
at the Kenya Bureau of Standards offices
yesterday.
Gurcharan Singh
Mr Ogada should thank Dr Gurcharan
Singh, who devoted 20 years of his life to
the development of the Tara-Klamp.
Dr Gurcharan had earlier come faceto-
face with young boys suffering from
horrible infections because of poorly
performed circumcisions. He travelled
around the world searching for better circumcision
methods.
He found none, and concluded that a
cleaner, safer method of circumcision had
to be developed. In 1996, when he won a
Gold Medal in Geneva, the whole world
took notice of his simpler, hygienic and
efficient way of circumcision.
Circumcision is generally performed
either in a surgical theatre, at home or
as in Kenya, in the bush. But it often
comes with problems — infections, accidental
amputations of the glans penis,
and bleeding among others. Most of these
problems occur because in all the circumcision
methods so far, the operation is of
invasive type.
Tara-Klamp, a relatively inexpensive
plastic circumcision device, is designed
for non-hospital environments. It is a
single use sterilised tool that comes in all
sizes from infant to adult. It was invented
in Malaysia.
It works by clamping off the foreskin
where it meets the shaft of the penis.
The two arms or levers of the clamp are
brought closer to the locking mechanisms
on the tube until two clicks are heard to
ascertain that the locking is secure.
No dressings are applied, and under petroleum
jelly lubricants and anaesthetic
only, the device is locked in place, crushing
a ring of tissue as well as cutting off
blood supply to the foreskin, which is then
painlessly cut off. The Tara-Klamp is left
on for four to seven days.
The method reduces cross infections of
say, HIV between circumciser and the circumcised
in cultural rites.
However, in case the size is incorrect,
the tight grip could result to injuries to the
clamped part. It costs about Sh1,200 exclusive
of other services like anaesthesia,
which could easily double or even triple
the cost, depending on the clinic.
Yesterday, the national standards regulator
said the approval for its use in government
hospitals was at the final stages;
private clinics already use Tara-Klamp.
Its chief supplier in Kenya, Bradmon
Healthcare Limited, says men are warming
up to the procedure, with 100 so far
circumcised, mainly in Nyanza and Western
provinces. Researchers say male circumcision
reduces the risk of HIV infection
by up to 60 per cent. So far, 60,000
Kenyans have been circumcised as part of
HIV prevention.
The Kenya Aids Indicator Survey of
2007 puts the number of uncircumcised
males aged 15-49 years at 1.2 million, with
health officials estimating that for health
impact in the prevention and control of
HIV and Aids, at least 1.1 million of these
people will have to be circumcised.
According to Mr Titus Oyoo, a Kebs officer,
Tara-Klamp is undergoing final quality
tests and is expected to be rolled out to
public hospitals. Common problems are
prevented because the surgery is of noninvasive
type, says Mr Charles Nyakure,
a clinical officer who performs the procedure
in his private clinic.
The procedure on Job was done on November
25, and the Tara-Klamp removed
five days later, his father, Mr Ogada, said.
