DAILY NATION Monday November 2, 2009
Prof Were suggests
simple disinfection
method that will
keep diarrhoea it bay

By JOHN NGIRACHU
bottle of water placed on a piece
of shiny roofing iron sheet may
not look like something that
vould prevent disease, but ac
cording to a leading Kenyan scientist, it
is a simple, vet effective, way to keep diar
rhoea at bay.
What of a book with a record of one’s
health from birth, and the tests carried
out on one and the myriad pricks and in
jections one has had up to the age of five
or even 20 years?
According to Prof Miriam Were, an
award-winning scientist and National
Aids Control Council chairperson, the
adoption of these apparently simple but
tested methods could be crucial in the
fight ainst child deaths
Expensive ways
Prof Were bubbles with enthusiasm when
she speaks about the methods she says
could be used before sophisticated and
expensive ways are available to the mil
lions of poor people in black Africa.
She says that, for instance, the bottle
in-the-sun method is easy to adopt and
cheap to implement, meaning that the
millions of Nairobi slum dwellers with
out access to clean water, or rural people
who do not have piped water, could ben
efit greatly.
The solar water disinfection uses the
sun’s ultra-violet ra to kill germs in
drinking water. The water is put in a plas
tic bottle and then in the sun for at least
six hours.
The method has been proved to kill E.
coil, a bacterium that causes food poison
ing. and one of the main causes of diar
rhoea. It kills the bacterium when the
water is exposed to the sun for a day when
it is bright, or two days when it is cloudy
“It requires a raised surfaœ and a piece
of shiny mabati to work:’ says Prof Were.
“In the rural areas, the rack that is used
for airing utensils may be used. We know
piped water is ideal, but before it becomes
available for all, this could work.”
The method has been proved to work
in parts that lie between 35 degrees north
and south of the Equator; and Africa lies
smack in the middle of the two latitudes.
She made her presentation on the
fourth day of the global health confer
enoe at Kenyatta International Confer
ence Centre, Nairobi, last Thursday.
The conference that closed on Friday
with the development of the Nairobi Call
for Action, was attended by health profes
sionals from all parts of the world. This
was the first time it was being held in Af
rica, and Thursday was the ‘frica thy”
on which focus was on health promotion
for the continent.
The Thursday morning session was
dominated by calls for policy-makers to
focus on the áÄfrican experienoe” to get
solutions to the myriad problems facing
the continent.
Prof Were’s second suggestion was the
maternal and child health handbook,
which is the result of studies in Nigeria
that show that mothers could be bet
ter than hospitals in keeping the card
containing the record of their children
progress from the pre-natal phase to five
years.
In Japan, the method has been proved
to work especially where a record of the
mother’s pregnancy and the child’s medi
cal history were placed in one book up to
‘11w solar water
disinfection uses the sun’s
ultra-violet rays to kill
germs in drinking water
age five. It has been practised there forGO
years, and in some provinces, records are
kept for up to 20 years. The book is then
handed over to the bridegroom to prove
that his bride is healthy.
Prof Were argued that the adoption of
the process could help in strengthening
medical eare and push efforts to attain
Millennium Development Goals four and
five. Goal four involves reducing child
mortality, while five is intended to im
prove maternal health.
From World Health Organisation
records, black Africa currently lags be
hind other regions in attaining the goals
set at the UN Millennium Summit in Sep
tember 2000. “Kenya is unlikely to meet
the MDG targets by 2015 at the current
rates. A lot needs to be done:’ said Public
Health assistant minister James Gesami
at the meeting.
Prof Were’s ideas received support
from Zimbabwe’s Health minister, Dr
Henry Madzorera. “We can’t have break
throughs in solving Africa’s health issues
by depending on the experiences of the
West’ he said.
“The African experienœ in getting rid
of poverty and disease is like the life of a
butterfly, and we need our own efforts to
2015
The year Millennium Development
Goals should have been achieved
break out of our cocoons’
Prof Were’s ideas also resonated with a
proposal by Dr Florence Muli-Musiime,
the African Medical Research Foundation
(Amref) deputy director.
Dr Muli-Musiime said the adoption of
simpLe and tested strategies should be ex
plored before governments and NGOs in
dulge in endless research and the so-called
new strategies. “There have been too many
good pilot projects and success stories.
Much is spent on funding new approaches
rather than upscaling simple, established
and successful projects,” she noted.
She cited projects in South Africa in
which traditional healers refer poible
11W patients to modern doctors and the
training of clinical officers in Southern
Sudan to carry out simple operations that
are usually the preserve of doctors.