DAILY NATION Tuesday December 1, 2009

Why HIV spreads faster among gays 60 per cent of men having sex WITH men also have other affairs with women

By MILLICENT MWOLOLO
s the world mails the World Aids
Day, the gay community in Kenya
is at the centre of the theories
bout new HIV infections.
While there is a general concern over
the high cases of new HW infections
among married couples, the fact that 60
per cent of men having sex with men
(MSM) in Kenya are also having sex with
women, appears to make them vulnerable
to two sources of infection.
‘These are married men, pethaps with
a girlfriend, but are also involved in sex
ual relations with men:’ explained David
¡Curia, manager of the Gay and Lesbian
Coalition of Kenya (GALK). The coalition
brings together five homosexual groups
Mr Kuria is also concerned that if pro-
grammes to fight Aids are not extended to
gays, then, “the war against Aids in Kenya
may be difficult to win’
In some places the virus is circulating
kst among married men in gay relation
ships. ‘They either bring the virus with
them into their network and circulate
it, or carry it from their network to their
spouses and gMfriends” Mr Kuria said.
Unlike Europe
Unlike Europe and America where there
is a difference in the type of 11W virus
among homosexuals and heterosexual, in
Kenya, the same type is spreading among
both. This means that there is a lot of
inter-phase between the two, he added.
He cites a number of factors respon
sible, among them, lack of Aids pro
grammes in Kenya that target sexual
minorities. “Without information, our
people imagine they are not vulnerable
to HW They have not seen anything that
tefis them they are at risk,” he explained.
This ignorance among most gays and
lesbians leads to unprotected sex
Mr Kurta says stigma and discrimina
tion of homosexuals hinders them from
getting medical treatment. “Whenever
gays are infected, many delay going to
hospital They resort to self-treatment,
and only seek proper medical care when
the illness is at an advanced stage,” he
said. This he added, posed a big challenge
in prevention and control of 11W virus.
Also, the chances of acquiring the virus
are higher among individuals who are not
on ARVs. Discrimination, which prevents
HW positive homosexuals from seeking
healthcare fuels the spread of the virus.
“In Nairobi the infection rate among mar
ried men is high as they actively interact
among their network,” Mr Ku na tid.
GALK, he said, was not interested in ad
vancing the gay agenda or gay marriages
as most people would think, “but to offer
services to the homosexual community,
‘(;ÀLK not interested
in advancing the
gay agenda or gay
marriages as most
people would think’
something that cannot happen if it con
tinues being criminalised.
“The definition that marriage should be
between a man and a woman is clear and
positive, but the government shouldadd a
clause that decriminalises homosexuality
in Kenya:’ Mr Kuria said and wants sec
tions 162, 163 and 165 of the ¡nal Code
repealed. “These sections hinder us from
providing Aids healthcare and prevention
services and items — condoms and lubri
cants — to the homosexual communit”
Safe networks
Flashing a brochure, titled “Safe sex for
men having sex with men”, Mr Kuria says
if he distributed it openly, he would be ar
rested and charged with aiding another
person to commit a felon3 ‘We only dis
tribute suth information among “safe net
works” (homosexual groups).
If we can offer services unique to mem
bers, then their Aids healthcare needs will
be met. But as long as the law stands, the
community will continue to die of Aids.
However:’ he added, “some colleagues
have promised to influenœ legislation”
Another story on back page.