SUNDAY NATION March 15, 2009

Fee-free school lights up Kibera


‘School of hope’ for
the Aids-aff ected lifts
burden of poverty for
families in slum

By PAUL O’CALLAGHAN

Shiundu Kweyu thanks God for the
one-room shack she shares with
her mother and fi ve siblings in Kibera
slums. Her reason? A conversation
she was able to overhear because of
the thin iron-sheet walls of her home has
renewed her hope in breaking free of the
shackles of poverty.
After her father died from Aids and with
her mother in poor health, Ms Kweyu had
given up on ever receiving a post-primary
education. But one evening while preparing
supper, she overheard her neighbours
discussing St Aloysius Gonzaga School – a
fee-free Catholic secondary school in Kibera,
which fi rst opened its doors for education
in 2004.
In the morning, she looked for the
school, sought to speak to the school
principal, Mr Dionisio Kiambi, and got
enrolled. “If it were not for St Aloysius
School, I would be working as a day labourer,
house-cleaning and doing laundry.
I would not have this bright future ahead
of me,” she said.
Work of mercy
The school is named after a young 17th
century Jesuit saint who put his theological
studies on hold to care for plague victims
in Rome; a work of mercy that led
to his death. In recognition of his care for
people who suff er from a dreaded disease,
St Aloysius was declared the patron saint
of Aids victims and their carers.
The school arose from the work of members
of Christian Life Community (CLC),
a Catholic lay movement that visits people
suff ering from Aids in Kibera. They
observed that people living with HIV expressed
grave concern for their children’s
future and especially their education.
In 2003, in response to this concern,
CLC sponsored the fi rst 12 Aids-aff ected
children to attend secondary school. Before
the year ended, the leaders of CLC
along with their Jesuit chaplain, Father
Terry Charlton, decided to start their own
fee-free secondary school for Aids-aff ected
youth. It would propagate an education
that would produce “men and women for
others”.
Today, this school of 265 students has
ambitious plans to build a permanent
school in May 2009, which would eventually
serve 420 students.
As well as providing students with daily
breakfast and lunch, the school also pays
their school fees, and buys their books
and writing materials. It also has a special
budget to assist students to buy school
uniform.
Despite the myriad problems Aids-affected
students living in Kibera face,
enthusiasm
and humour abound among
them. It is remarkable to meet young people
who have every reason to be hopeless
yet instead focus on their plans and hopes
for a brighter future.
Life skills
Ms Jill Juma, a biology and chemistry
teacher at St Aloysius, says, “I go beyond
just being a science teacher. I want to
teach life skills and empower young lives.
Providing a free education is lifting the
burden of poverty for families.”
“This is the school of hope,” enthused
Atieno Perez Okomo, a grateful Form 4
student. “The teachers at St Al’s really
care for us and they give us hope for a better
future.”