SUNDAY NATION September 27, 2009

Recent fiidings show
higher infections in
areas where most
males are ‘eut’
By ARThtMOKBA
A s thousands of young men in
Nnza Province troop to health
centres to be circumcised in
hopes of frnding off HIV. new
studies show it might be too early to
claimvictory.
Although circumcision has been touted
as one of the ways to prevent NW infec
tion. recent findings show an increase
in 11W infection in regions where most
niales are circumcised.
According to findings of the Kewss
Aids Indicator Survey (liais) released
last week. North Eastern and Ccnst prov
inces, where 97 per cent of unies are cir
cumcised, registered an increase in mv
prenlence.
Withina spanoffweynrs.HWpreva
lence in North Eastern and Cast prov
inces increased front O to 1.0 per cent
and from 5.8 per cent to 83 per cent re
spectiv
In the saine peeled, NW pre’sulence in
Nyara Province, where stsrnt4ß per cent
of naJes are circumcised, sisnl at 15 per
cent the highest in the county.
These are sobering statistics for youn
men who have mshed to get circumcise
in he belief that doing en would provide
complete protection from HWinfection.
The new findings of grosing llWptn
leone srnongcircuincised males indicates
the pinctice cannot conipletelyprotect an
individual from 1-4W infection unless it is
combined with other practices indu ding
using condoms. being faithful to one pert-
ncr. or abstaining from ser.
1-lesIth officials acknowl edge that get
tingpeopletolookatcircumcision in the
larger context of other factors and strate
gies can be challenging.
‘The figures front these two provinces
are sending a werning that circumcision
alone is not the magic bullet to control
ling the disease. Other methods have to
he used in combination:’ sid Dr tbnshim
Mohammed. Head of National Aids and
511) Control Programmes in the Ministry
of Medical Services.
The increase in preaJence in commu
nities that circunrise indicates there are
other factors that contnbute to the spread
of the disease among maies in addition
to being uncircamcised. Multiple seitossl
garuters. towcusdom useand alcohol and
drugabuse are sorne of the hctomn.
‘Unless we address all the reamna pre
dispesing people to NW infection, we
might not main much beadwey” said
Judy Adero. who has lived with the virus
for nine years.
But scientists still believe circumcision
will result in the lowering of UtYpren
lence in provinces suchaaNyarrza.
DrDavid DeCock, director of the Keuw
office of the US Centers for Disease Con
troL sid there is no doubt that circumci
sion preut mV infection.
The Kale study she mv prelence
ainongdrcumci sed men aged between 20
ajid 64 years wee appwzimately three to
seven times lower than among uncircuni
cisedmen in the sanie age range.
The study further shows that the cate of
141V prevalence among circumcised men
wss 3.9 per cent compared to 13.2 per
cent among the uncircumcised men. Bu
oyed t these signiticant differences, the
gcwernmentand other organisations have
opened 300 circumcision centres.
More than 30,000 men have been cir
cumcised since the call first went out; the
target of IOqQOO circumcised nvn is ex
pected to be rached by year’s end.
Meanwhile, female activists have criti
cised the ay the whole operation is being
carried out, arguing that it is making
women more vulnerable as men engage
in sex with multiple partners ure in the
knowledge that they are safe.
The decision to adopt circumcision as
one methcel in the 141V prevention slat
egy has been inMmed by research find
ings of three main studies done in South
Africa. 1.nda and Kenya which showed
circunrision to reduce the risk of 141V in
fection by up toGO per cent.
This wea fitllowed by World Health Or
ganisation and UNAIda issuing strong
recommendations for increased male
circunrision isla in countries where the
WVpreiulence is high.
Two years ago. Kim t)iclcmn, coeni ins
br of the jint WHO, UNAida working
group that came up with the recommen
dations told the journal Nag. &*naeê:
“We reviewed all the evidence, and the
evidence is compelling,”
In the South Aftica stud’c circumcision
wes found to reduce 111V infection rates
by more than 60 per cent in a group of
3ß00 WV-negative men.
Of the L3G men who were circumcised,
30 became infected with 141V while 49 of
the 1,582 uncircunrised men became in
fected.
The findings made the South African
scientists undertake large-ecale male dr
cuincision as a possible strst for pre
venting two nsllllon NW infections and
300,000 datha in their country over the
next loyeam
In December 20Œ, the Data Safety
Monitoring Board that wss ceerseeiuythe
Kennn and lnthn male circumcision
trisla announced the operation was a safe
and effective way to reduce 111V infection
among men.