DAILY NATION Monday November 2, 2009

Prof Were suggests simple disinfection method that will keep diarrhoea at bay

By JOHN NGIRACHU

A bottle of water placed on a piece
of shiny roofing iron sheet may
not look like something that
would prevent disease, but ac
cording to a leading Kenytin scientist, it
is a simple, yet efkctive, way to keep diar
rhoeaat bay.
What ofa book witha record of ones
health from birth, and the tests carried
out ononeand the myriad priclcsand in
jections one has had up to the age of five
or even 20 yeas?
According to Prof Miriam Were, an
award-winning scientist and National
Aids Control Council chairperson, the
adoption of these apparently simple but
tested methods could be a cmcial 6ctor
in the fight against child deaths
Expensive ways
Prof Were bubbles with enthusiasm when
she speaks about the methods she say’s
could be used before sophisticated and
apensive ways al? available to the mil
lions of poor people in black Africa,
She siys that. for instance, the bottle-
in-the-sun method is easy to adopt and
cheap to implement, meaning that the
millions of Nairobi slum dweLlers with
out access to clean water, or runil people
who do not have piped water, could ben
efltgreitlv.
The solar water disiniection uses the
sun’s ultra-violet rays to kill germs in
drinkingwaten The water is put tnaplas
tic bottle and then in the sun for at least
six hou ix
The method has been proved to kill E.
coIl, a bacterium that causes hid poison
ing, and one of the main causes of diar
rhoea. It kills the bacterium when the
water is expceed to the sun fora daywhen
It Is bright, or two days when it is cloudy.
‘It requiresa raisea sur6ce and a piece
of shiny matuti to wort says Prof Were.
“In the runil areas the nick that is used
for airing utensils may be used. We know
piped water is ideaL but before it becomes
available for all thiscould worlC
The method has been proved to work
in parts that Lie between 35 degrees north
and south of the equator, and Africa lies
smack in the middle of the two latitudes,
She made her presentation on the
fourth day of the global health confer
ence at Kenvatta International Cbnfor
ence Centre, Nairobi, last Thursday.
The conference that closed on Friday
with the development of the Nairobi Call
for Action, was attended by health profes
sionals from all pins of the world. This
was the first time it was being held in M
riot, and Thursday was the “Africa Day”
on which focus was on health promotion
for the continent.
The Thurstlay morning session was
dominated by nills for policy makers to
focus on the “African e,’cperience” to get
solutions to the myriad problems Lacing
the continent,
Prof Were’s second suestion was the
maternal and child health handbook,
which is the result of studies in Nigeria
that show that mothers could be bet
ter than hospitals in keeping the card
containing the record of their children’s
progre from the prenatal phase to five
years.
In Japan. the method has been proved
to work especially where a record of the
mother’s pregnancyand the child’s medi
cal history were placed in one book upto
The solar water
disinfection tises the sun’s
ultra—violet ras to kill
genns iii drinking water
age five. It has been practised there for 60
years. and in some provinces, records are
kept for up to 20 years. The book Is then
handed over to the brk1emom to prove
that his bride ishiIthy.
Prof Were argued that the adoption of
the process could help in strengthening
mediotl care and push efforts to attain
Millennium Development Goals four and
Goal four involves reducing child
mortality, while five is intended to 1m-
pnwe maternal health.
From World Health Organisation
records, black Mrioi currently lags be-
kind other regions in attaining the goals
set at the UN Millennium Summit In Sep
tember 2000. Kenya is unlilceìvto meet
the MDG targets by 2015 at the current
rates. A lot needs to be donst’ sud Public
Health assistant minister humes Gesumi
at the meeting.
Prof Weres ideas received support
from Zimbabwe’s health minister. Dr
Henry MadwrerL “We Can’t have break
throughs In solving Africa’s heakh imues
by depending on the experiences of the
West.” he said.
“The Áfncan esperience In getting rid
of poverty and disease Is like the life of a
butterfly, and we need our own efforts to
2015
The millenium development goals should have been achieved if we
break out of our cocoons”
Prof Were ideas also resonated with a
proposul by Dr florence Muli-Musilme.
the African Medical Rescureti Foundation
(Aluref) deputy director.
Dr Muli-Musiime sud the adoption of
simple and tested strategies should be ex
plored before governments and NGC In
dulg in endle research and the so-called
new strategies. There have been too many
good pilot projects and success stories.
Much Is spent on tùnding new appinuches
rather than uçacaling simple. established
and succeful projects,” she noted.
She cited projects in South Africa in
whith traditional healeis refer poesible
HIV patients to mntlern doctois. and the
tminmg of cLinical officeis in Southern
Sudan to carry out simple openutions that
are usually the preserve of dœtois