Wednesday July 22, 2009

WHATALIFE!
An 'alternate' source of information
US teens are getting sex education but
most are not learning about birth confrol
from their parert, new government data
showed last week. And rates of infection
with sexuallytransmitted diseases reflect
this - the annual rate of Aids diagnoses
for boys aged 15 to 19 years has nearly
doubled in the past 10 years and rates of
syphilis are also up. The numbers show
that US youth need better sex educaton.
the US Centres for Disease Control and
Prevention said
The new administi-ation of President
Baradc Obama fas bee, dropping some
of the more controversial poT ioesof the
forme Bush government.inckidingan
emphasis onabstrnenceonly education.
911e datapresented in this report indicate
that many oung persons in the United
States engage in actual risic behaviour
and ocperience negatiÆ reproductive
healthoutomes’ the CDCwrote in its
weekly report on death and disease.
Forth report the CDC canp4ed data
from many different stidies of hundreds
ofthousandsofdiil&enandcungadrits
aged 10 to 25. Sorne of the findings
Wrnong 18 and 19 year vlds 49.8 per
centof girls andpist 35 percent of boys
had talkedwithaparentabout methods
of birth controL
•More than 80 percentof boys and girls
said they had received formal instruction
before age l8on how tosaynotoset
•NearlylO percentof teen girlsand 66
per cent of boys had receised instruction
on methods of birth controL
•Nearlylo percentof scurig women
aged IBto 24 said their first intercourse
was involuntary
•lnfections with the human immune
deficency virus that causes Aids rose
amongboysagedlstol9fromL3 cases
per 100.000 m1997to Zscasesin 2006.
Boy floats down river on toy truck
A Canadian boy celebrating his third
birthday was unhurt and apparendy
unfazedafterhefloated l2kmdowna
riser riding atop his toy truck. pdice said
last week. Theboys family wascamping
ata popLiarparknearFortStjohn, in
northeastem British Columbia when
the boy wandered off unnoticed and
somehow entered the nearby Peace Rivet
Royal Canadian Mounted Bike said.
Theboyspasentsat fistthoi.hthe
was playingwithother relativesat the
campsite. But police were lateralerted
and had begun a search when a boater
found the boy. and the toyabout 12km
away.After a nearly two hourjourney
down the swiftmoving riser the boy had
no fluries and was appareitiy unaware
of the danger he had been in.”He was
very exited to see the policC Mid RCMP
Constable Jaclelynn Passarell
Here is my job res cmnay
Tying mistakes in ajob appiration can
kill a winid be ençloyee’s dianceof
landing ajo as employers bet thata
sloppy resume means theapplicantwill
do a sloppy job. A telephone surwy of
100 senior Canadian exeactives showed
thatmorethanafifthofaecuthessaid
a single typo ona resume or cover letter
coiid costa potential employee a job.
whde 28 percent said two mistakes would
kdl theirchances. The survey, published
last week, was carried out byoriinejob
search fim.kœunterops.
9lie resume isan applicant’s
first chance to impress the firi
manager.” said Kathryn Bolt. presideit
of Accountemps Canadianoperations.
“Mistakes on one’s application materials
may prompt em ployers to assume there
also will be mistales made cm the job”
Common mistales lidude: “Dear Sr
or Madman”, ‘I’m attacking my resume
for 3cuto review”, “Folkiwing isa grief
overview of my ski Ils” and “Havea keen
eyeforderait”
Reuters