DAILY NATION WEDNESDAY JULY 29, 2009
THE NIGHT THAT CHANGED MY LIFE

As debate rages on about the Waki envelope, many like 42-year-old Faith
Akinyi can’t understand the delayed justice. 

As told to MILLICENT MWOLOLO

There was a time when my family lacked for nothing. We lived in our own house in Nairobi and my kids were driven to and from school. I had a thriving 	 
business and travelled all over the major 	 
East African markets – Kampala, Malaba, 	 
Dar es Salaam, Kigali – delivering curios 	 
and purchasing garments for sale. I had 	 
about 10 employees and business was 	 
booming… I could easily afford to pay 	 
for my children’s holiday trips as well as 	 
provide a wide variety of foods for their 	 
enjoyment. Although I had been widowed 	 
for about 10 years, I had managed to raise 	 
all four of them on my own. Everything 	 
was going well for us until that fateful 	 
Monday evening of December 31, 2007. 	 
There was tension everywhere following 	 
claims that the general election results 	 
had been ‘stolen’. We expected anything 	 
to happen and the fear was intense. Sure 	 
enough, a group of men broke into the 	 
compound of my house in Kariobangi. 	 
Before I could collect my thoughts, they 	 
had forced my door open. One of them hit 	 
me on the head before the rest subjected 	 
me to the kind of treatment we see on TV 	 
when a person is caught stealing. They 	 
call it mob justice, except that I had done 	 
nothing wrong. 	 
After a few minutes of beating me 	 
almost senseless, they dragged me several 	 
metres from my house and did the worst 	 
thing that can happen to any woman 	 
– rape. I was gang-raped while my house 	 
was cleaned of all my household goods. 	 
When they were through, they poured 	 
something on me. It was a cold liquid 	 
that trickled down my body and caused 	 
a tingling sensation. Then I heard one of 	 
the men saying, “Kwa nini mumempiga 	 
na tulisema hatutawapiga wamama? 	 
(why have you beaten her when we all 	 
agreed not to beat the women?)” Then 	 
they all left. 	 
Great pain 	 
I lay there in great pain and when I stood 	 
up several hours later, it was to discover a 	 
big wound on my head and some bleeding 	 
from my private parts. I vowed not to 	 
tell anyone I had been raped lest I was 	 
subjected to humiliation and ridicule. I 	 
certainly didn’t need that at this low point 	 
of my life. I was a very committed Christian 	 
who led women in worship during church 	 
services. I did not want those who knew 	 
me to start laughing at me for serving a 	 
God who could not protect me from being 	 
raped and beaten almost to death. 	 
I could see my house burning but I did 	 
not dare venture near it because I didn’t 	 
know what they had poured on me. I ran 	 
outside the gate and saw several fires lit 	 
on the sides of the main road. I ran in the 	 
opposite direction towards the church, 	 
which was closed. I knew there was a tap 	 
behind the church building so I jumped 	 
over the fence and made for the tap where 	 
I washed off as much of the liquid as I 	 
could. I still remember how I felt at that 	 
moment. God had betrayed me. 	 
I headed for a market stall nearby to 	 
hide in my fear and shame. When morning 	 
came I was very weak. I had not eaten 	 
anything the previous night. The stall 	 
owner came and found me hiding and 	 
when I narrated my ordeal, she offered 	 
me some food and advised me to go to 	 
a nearby hospital where a nurse dressed 	 
the wound on my head. By this time, my 	 
hair had started falling off and I was bald 	 
in some places. My children were not at 	 
home when the attackers struck – they had 	 
gone up-country to Bondo a week earlier.
Now here I was all alone and with nowhere
to call home. The stalls became my hideout
and I stayed there a whole week, begging
from the owners for survival. Some people
thought I was a mad woman.
One morning I woke up feeling very
sick. I was bald and my body had sores
wherever the mysterious liquid had
landed. I did not know what else to do so
I walked slowly to the Kariobangi police
post. I found that many people had sought
refuge there. I found doctors there who
took me to Kenyatta National Hospital
where I received treatment for the sores.
I learnt they were as a result of acid – the
liquid that was poured on me the night of
the attack.
Life at the makeshift camp at the police
post was far from rosy. I felt alone and
rejected as people ran away from me
because of the state I was in – pus oozed
from my sores and no one would share a
tent with me. If anyone gave me water to
drink, they threw away the cup.
I lost all track of time as my life had
come to a standstill. I remember my 15-
year-old son arriving from up-country to
see me and saying it was February. I still
remember him fainting at the sight of his
disheveled mother and the realisation
that we had lost everything we owned as
a family. My eldest daughter, aged 17, was
in Form Three at the time and managed
only two terms before she was forced out
of school for lack of fees.
I was no longer running my business and
had eaten into my savings to buy medicine,
so I couldn’t help her. This aff ected me
psychologically because I had determined
to see that all my children went through
school. Instead, with me living at the camp
and my daughter staying upcountry with
my two other daughters – aged 13 and 11
– she got pregnant. She had a baby early
this year.
Although I received treatment until the
sores healed, I never confi ded in any of
the doctors about being raped until a few
weeks ago when I started experiencing
a lot of discomfort when passing urine
and a lot of pain in my lower abdomen.
Fortunately, tests revealed that I had not
contracted the HIV virus. My head is
swollen from the blow I received but I have
been unable to raise the money needed for
a head scan.
My relatives disowned me a long time
ago saying I had Aids and so there was
no point in helping me get treatment
because the disease has no cure. A brother
of mine even said I should be taken home
(upcountry) to die hence reduce funeral
expenses.
I left the camp and found a small room
I now call home in Kariobangi. It costs
Sh2,000 to rent; this is paid for by wellwishers
from the church. I have not been
able to visit the compound where my house
once stood, but I have heard that people
have erected stalls on it. A few months I
was diagnosed with hypertension; I wasn’t
really surprised in view of what I’ve been
through. Needless to say I cannot aff ord
the medication.
There have been many times when I’ve
lost the will to live. But thoughts of my
children keep me hanging on. I’ve come
to believe God wants me alive to tell what
happened even though it is very hard
for me to accept how much my life has
changed. It has been even more diffi cult
for my children to adjust, especially the
younger ones. Memories of our old life are
making them ill. They can’t understand
that we can’t celebrate their birthdays the
way we used to.
Asthma attack
This thought alone has caused the lastborn
to suff er asthma attacks. I thank God
for the support from their teachers and
others around them to help them come
to terms with our loss. One well-wisher
even helped my son enroll in Form One
this year. I’ll take the help for as long as
it comes and worry about what happens
next later.
I have heard a lot of talk about where
the perpetrators of the violence should
be tried. Justice for me means having
the people whose names are in the Waki
Envelope face trial at The Hague. It pains
me deeply whenever I hear politicians on
TV saying our local courts are as good as
The Hague. They don’t know what they’re
talking about. The Hague means a lot to
people like me.
A local tribunal would not only be subject
to manipulation by selfish individuals
given the widening rifts between our
politicians owing to suspicion, but it could
also trigger anxiety among Kenyans given
that we identify our political leaders by
tribe, which could draw us right back to
where we were at the time of the elections.
Helpless Kenyans like me feel justice can
only be served if these people are tried at
The Hague.

mmwololo@nation.co.ke