Tuesday November 24, 2009 DAILY NATION

Testing drive on to fight Aids

By JOY WANJA
More than one million Kenyans
are expected to get tested for
HIV during a national campaign
launched yesterday.
The drive is expected to target more
than 77 per cent of adults in all types of
relationships who are unaware of their
partners’ HIV status.
Public Health and Sanitation minister
Beth Mugo urged Kenyans to visit voluntary
counselling and testing (VCT) centres
to be set up in most towns, residential
areas and social places.
“We can not claim to protect our loved
ones yet we do not want to get tested,” Mrs
Mugo said, adding that couple testing was
important to reduce the rate of new infections
in steady relationships.
Testing at night, and at workplaces,
door-to-door approach, and mobile centres
are some of the strategies in this year’s
campaign to increase the number of people
to be tested. The campaign, which
will run for three weeks at health centres
countrywide, will end on December 12.
In a similar campaign last year, 700,000
people were tested.
The National Aids and STI Control Programme
head Nicholas Muraguri cited the
youth as the most vulnerable groups and
called for vigorous campaigns to encourage
them to get tested.
Dr Muraguri pointed out that denial
that the youth are at risk was one of the
barriers in controlling new infections
among those aged between 20 and 24
years. “Women are four times more at
risk of contracting HIV compared to their
male counterparts,” Dr Muraguri told
Daily Nation in an interview.
The HIV prevalence among women
stood at 11 per cent compared to 3.9 per
cent among men in the same age group.
However, men were the most affected
group after the age of 55, with an 8.3 per
cent prevalence.
Mrs Mugo urged the youth to get tested
to plan wisely for their families.
She further challenged the youth to involve
themselves in productive ventures
to avoid boredom that later exposed them
A million Kenyans
expected to know
their HIV status
during campaign
to risky sexual behaviour.
“We expect to meet a target of 10 million
people tested by June next year,” the
minister said.
According to the Kenya Aids Indicator
Survey, there was an increase in HIV
awareness among those aged between 15
and 49 years although two thirds had not
been tested.
The minister called on those who had
tested positive to maintain healthy lifestyles
through diet, seeking medication
and adopting behaviour change to avoid
infecting others and acquiring new strains
of the virus.
“Make an informed choice and visit a
VCT centre to plan your life wisely,” she
said. According to government statistics,
45 per cent of people who got tested are
in discordant relationships, thus making
difficult to monitor the spread pattern of
the disease if one of the partners refused
to get tested.