WEDNESDAY JULY 15, 2009

HEALTH

HOW MEDICATION AFFECTS YOUR TEETH

Adverse reactions to medication
have been known to spread to
other parts of the body, including
the teeth. These side effects include
discolouration, sensitivity and damaged
tooth structures.
Fluoride from sources such as water,
toothpaste and prescribed tablets has
long been recognised for its potential to
cause tooth discolouration or damage,
more so when the hard outer tooth
covering is undergoing formation and
maturation. This is especially true when
the intake of fluoride is high. At a lower
intake, the magnitude and severity of
decay is significantly reduced.
Some antibiotics, such as
tetracycline can cause discolouration of
tooth enamel when prescribed during
tooth development. Women exposed to
such drugs during the second or third
trimester of pregnancy may deliver
babies who will have discoloured teeth.
Since mineralisation of the permanent
teeth is not complete until a child is
eight years old, such drugs should not
be used by anyone under that age.
Some types of mouthwash
liquids, oral iron salts in liquid form
and essential oils may also cause
discolouration. Any sugar-containing
(liquid) medication has the potential
to cause an increased incidence of
dental cavities, especially in children.
Wherever possible, get sugar-free
medications.
Some drugs can cause regurgitation
of food from the stomach, resulting
in gastric acid in the mouth and a
subsequent increased risk for tooth
erosion. Drugs such as aspirin and
some mouth wash preparations also
have the potential to cause erosion.
Powdered forms of anti-asthma
drugs are acidic, thus posing a risk for
erosion.
There are medications that cause
a dry mouth, which can result in
damaged teeth. Decongestants and
cold cures, stomach ulcer solutions,
HIV and Aids treatments and
antidepressants can cause dryness
of the mouth. And some medications
used to treat childhood cancers such as
leaukemia may lead to abnormal dental
development. The severity of this is
related to the age of the child, the
dosage and the duration of treatment.
Dental abnormalities associated with
cancer medications include missing
teeth, arrested tooth development and
teeth appearing smaller than normal.
Some drugs may have adverse effects
on other areas of the mouth, including
altered taste, ulceration and swelling of
the gums.
Dr Kamau Kinyenje
pointofcare@africaonline