WEDNESDAY APRIL 8, 2009

LIVING POSITIVELY
There are several
opportunities to meet
with the Creator
Last week I attended Prayer Day at my
son’s school. Many times I don’t really
pay attention as preachers repeat what
I’ve heard countless times before. Indeed,
sometimes I switch them off and switch on to
other matters as they drone on. But this time,
for some inexplicable reason, I listened to the
sermon like my life depended on it.
The theme was something that makes most
of us shift uncomfortably in our seats: giving.
Not just perfunctory giving, but the one that’s
done unconditionally. To say the sermon
opened my eyes would be an understatement.
When it comes to giving, I think I score nine
out of 10. For instance, following a call last
year to help those affected by the post-election
violence, I went through every wardrobe in
my house and selected what we hadn’t worn
or used in a long time. And I can’t count the
number of HIV people who have lived with me
while they recuperated.
But that, according to the sermon, was not
enough. “It’s not about giving what we don’t
require,” the preacher said. “It’s about giving
what we love, what we need most.”
The preacher gave the first example: “God
gave His only begotten son Jesus Christ…”
“Oh, my! You mean giving means I should
surrender one of my sons?” I asked myself.
“That’s too much. Only God can do that.”
“The other example is Abraham, who was
willing to sacrifice his only son…” Fast and
furious, he gave more Biblical examples of
unconditional givers – ordinary mortals who
gave extraordinarily.
How many times have I turned God away
because I didn’t have a surplus or, more
precisely, I didn’t have what I don’t require?
And how come in all the years I’ve read the
Scriptures and been in community service it
hasn’t once dawned on me that it’s only in true
giving that I can meet God?
“Church, whenever you’re giving
unconditionally you’re having a face-to-face
meeting with God.”
The sermon caused me to reflect on my
work. Am I in the HIV sub-sector because
it’s a calling or a business? I know there are
those of us who have formed non-government
organisations not because of what we hope to
sow but because of what we’ll reap. I’ve been
at it long enough to know how easy it is for one
to get priorities mixed up. But if I know what
I stand for – that mine is a calling and not a
business venture – I won’t fall for anything.
This reminds me of a Good Samaritan who
called our office a month ago and insisted she
wanted me to be present when she dropped
her donation. To our surprise, she gave us
brand new clothes she had bought abroad.
“You mean one can donate new clothes?”
we wondered, feeling challenged after she had
left, and recalling the way we usually donate
only the rags we don’t want!
Through these experiences, God taught me
something: giving is about sharing my best and
blessing someone else. In addition, in giving
what I don’t need or require, I miss out on the
opportunity to meet God.
Divine encounters occur in all manner of
places. God is in the face of the emaciated
woman eating wild berries, and the
malnourished baby suckling her mother’s
empty breast. This Easter, I pray that God
would open your inner eyes like He did mine.
This Easter, give cheerfully.
asuntawagura@hotmail.com
Meeting God
when we give
This is the diary of Asunta Wagura, a mother
of two who tested positive 20 years ago.
She is the executive director of the Kenya
Network of Women with Aids (KENWA).