WEDNESDAY AUGUST 26, 2009
HEALTH:

ABOUT THOSE TEETHING PROBLEMS


Most parents regard the appearance of
an infant’s first tooth as a significant
developmental milestone. However,
the teething period can be difficult and
distressing for both baby and parents. Most
children get their first tooth around six
months of age and have a complete set of 20
primary teeth by 30 months. Teeth tend to
emerge in pairs, with the lower teeth erupting
prior to the upper teeth. Girls often get their
teeth earlier than boys.
Everyone seems to have a list of symptoms
they believe are linked to teething. However,
a proper diagnosis of teething seems to
alleviate and calm parental anxiety. The
symptoms seen most consistently are biting/
mouthing, drooling, gum rubbing, increased
irritability, appetite disturbance and mild
temperature elevation. Other signs commonly
attributed to teething –diarrhoea/loose stool,
coughing, congestion, ear rubbing, rashes,
vomiting, higher fever and convulsions – have
not been found to have any relationship to
teething.
These signs are much more likely to have
another cause as during this time, a baby’s
immunity from maternal antibodies is waning
and exposure to a wide variety of childhood
illnesses could occur.
With the understanding that teething
causes localised symptoms at the point of
eruption, the best treatments are those that
relieve these complaints. The expression
“born with a silver spoon in his mouth” has
its origin as a teething remedy. Most silver
spoons, however, have been replaced by more
affordable textured or cold teething rings for
infants to ‘gnaw’ on. The low temperature
of the object causes localised constriction
of blood vessels and decreases the
inflammation, and biting on the object gives
relief by applying pressure to the gums.
Using a clean finger, moistened gauze pad
or damp washcloth to massage the baby’s
gums could also help in easing discomfort.
Other treatments, such as teething biscuits
and frozen or cold vegetables (carrots or
peeled cucumber) work by creating pressure
on the gums. However, such remedies should
not be used on children who are not yet
eating solid foods. High sugar content foods
are not recommended.
Supervision is needed to ensure that small
pieces of food do not break off and pose a
choking hazard. Teething rings should be
attached to the infant’s clothing, and not
tied around the neck, as strangulation could
result. The conservative use of painkillers
(paracetamol and ibuprofen) could also ease
any teething discomfort. Other popular overthe-
counter remedies such as those that are
rubbed directly on the baby’s gums should
be used with caution and are generally not
recommended.
Dr Kamau Kinyenje
pointofcare@africaonline.co.ke