WEDNESDAY MAY 27, 2009

MAKING A CASE FOR BREASTFEEDING
What every new mother needs to know about it. 

By DOROTHY KWEYU

Three of my children breastfed
exclusively for four months and
two of them continued even
after weaning for up to threeand-
a-half years. However, I am
not accusing any mother of failing to take
advantage of the natural resource that
is breast milk. I was only able to achieve
this after Unicef and the World Health
Organisation launched the 1983 Code of
Marketing of Breast Milk Substitutes. The
code sought to lock out infant formula
manufacturers from maternity wards and
other health facilities.
Before that, many mothers, myself
included, were caught up in the infant
formula manufacturers’ aggressive
marketing campaigns that saw breast milk
substitute gift packs given to them as they
left maternity wards. The strategy killed
many mothers’ urge to breastfeed.
The decade after WHO/Unicef’s launch
of the code saw an unprecedented surge
in breastfeeding. No wonder my last three
children benefi tted from a prolonged
breast milk diet.
Then scientifi c evidence began to show
that breastfed babies could contract
Aids from their HIV-positive mothers. It
struck a body blow to mothers who were
frightened by the possibility of infecting
their babies.
Many mothers wish to breastfeed their
babies but are hampered by a host of
reasons, including fear that they do not
have enough milk or that breastfeeding
is agony. The truth is any mother who
has given birth successfully can initiate
breastfeeding if she is helped to latch the
baby onto the breast immediately.
Babies are born with an instinct for
survival and will latch onto the breast with
abandon. It is the process of suckling that
triggers ‘let down’ – the mechanism that
causes milk to fl ow into the milk ducts
that are located just above the nipple.
For fi rst-time mums, the fi rst attempt
at breastfeeding can be an excruciating
experience. Support from a nurse, an
experienced relative or friend becomes a
blessing.
Sheri Bayles, a registered nurse
with more than 20 years’ experience
dismisses the notion in some books that
if breastfeeding hurts, you’re doing it
wrong. “That is actually incorrect. Most
women experience some discomfort, if not
outright pain when they fi rst latch a baby
on… However, within a couple of minutes,
it should become tolerable. If it is tolerable,
it is correct. If it is still excruciating, relatch
the baby,” she says, adding that most
soreness dissipates within two weeks.
Successful breastfeeding is based on the
principle that emptying causes refi lling; so
the more the baby breastfeeds, the more
the milk fl ows. To minimise the pain on
the breast, ensure that the baby’s mouth
covers both the nipple and the areola
(the small circular dark area around the
nipple) since you are likely to suff er more
pain if the baby suckles at the nipple.
When this happens, the baby will not get
any milk, causing both you and your baby
frustration.
Medical research has shown that breast
milk has all the nutrients a baby needs.
Indeed, the baby can survive on exclusive
breastfeeding for four-to-six months.
During this time, he is also building
immunity because the mother passes on
her immunity to him.
An exclusively breastfed baby is unlikely
to suff er from constipation. If your baby
is calm after breastfeeding and is gaining
weight at each well-baby clinic, there
should be no pressure to go for breast milk
substitutes.
Feeding bottles have been linked to
diarrhoea and vomiting, which can kill a
baby within 24 hours. The good old cup
is usually the best way to wean the baby
from the breast. It is easier to ensure the
cleanliness of a cup than a bottle. While
most babies will initially resist anything
other than Mum’s warm breast, they
quickly learn to drink milk from a cup
(some mothers use a cup and spoon).
Ideally, nursing mothers should be given
at least six months to breastfeed. Since
it is diffi cult for working mothers to get
such extended periods away from their
employers, the best strategy is to express
breast milk and leave it at home with the
person caring for the baby. Breast milk can
remain fresh at room temperature for at
least 24 hours; it can also be refrigerated.
However, there are situations when
breastfeeding may be diffi cult. A mother
who is heavily medicated, or who has had
a Caesarean section delivery needs special
support to breastfeed. And a good doctor
will normally ask if you are nursing before
prescribing certain drugs.
A premature baby of less than 36 weeks
gestation is incapable of latching onto the
breast and mothers should be taught to
express so that the baby can be tube-fed.
It is important to avoid mastitis when
you are breastfeeding. This is likely to
occur if the baby is not emptying the
breast. Mastitis is a bacterial infection that
occurs when milk remains in the ducts,
clogging them and causing infl ammation.
If you feel feverish with painful swelling
of the breast that is hot to touch, seek
medical attention at once. Unattended
mastitis can lead to an abscess, which is
the build-up of pus.
If you have baby who is a lazy feeder
– one who falls asleep before emptying the
breast – it is wise to express the milk and
store it for cup feeding.
dkweyu@nation.co.ke