Sunday Nation July 26, 2009

TELL AUNTIE LIZ

I am HIV positive and stressed
Dear Auntie Liz,
I am in Form 2. I lost my parent when I was in Class
Two to a monster called Aids. We were wealthy
but now I often sleep on an empty stomach. When
I was in Class Six, I became sickly, always in and
out of hospital. I fi nally got tested for HIV and to
my shock I was positive. I tried committing suicide
but it did not work. This has aff ected my grades.
Although my aim is get an A- in KCSE, I doubt I will
make it because currently my average is D-. But I
have many friends including nuns, priests, doctors
and nurses but I always lie to them I do very well
in school. I don’t want to continue lying and my
dream is to be a lawyer in future. I am confused
and stressed. I feel like taking a stronger poison so
that I can end all my problems.
Ochieng’
Kisumu
Dear Ochieng’,
You must remember that God is the Giver of life
and He is the only one who can take it. Besides,
there are better ways of fi nding solutions to
problems than attempting to commit suicide. I
must admit I like your determination to change
your life for better. You must hang on to this
because things will certainly be better.
What you lack probably is someone to guide you.
The advantage you have is that you mentioned
people in your circle of friends who are actually
good role models to you and who can help you
focus better. You probably haven’t told them the
whole truth about what you are going through. You
should, for instance, stop lying about your grades
because then all looks ok to them. You should also
tell them about your HIV status in case they are not
aware. This you should do immediately and they
are likely to help you.
Of course it’s too much to lose your parent at an
early age and later to discover you are HIV positive.
This could be the reason you are stressed and this
is aff ecting your performance in class. What you
should remember is that being HIV positive is not
a death sentence. Today there are life-prolonging
drugs and you can live a healthy life for long. I
believe your friends will be kind enough to help
you access the medication and to pass your exams
to achieve your dream of becoming a lawyer. All
the best Ochieng’.
My mother favours my
younger brother
Dear Auntie Liz,
I got a problem with my mother. When my
younger brother asks for something, my mother
gets him. When I ask for anything, she keeps
quiet and doesn’t even bother to explain why
she can’t give what I ask for. I feel she favours
my brother. I want to run away from home and
leave the two of them. Please help.
Gachiri,
Thika
Dear Gachiri,
You are likely to be feeling unloved and
unappreciated by your mother because she doesn’t
give you what you ask for. You may want her to
treat you fairly or at least the same way she treats
your younger brother. The best way to handle this
situation is through communication. Unless you
sit down with your mother and explain to her how
you feel, you are unlikely to change things. And
running away from home won’t help matters. You
will always feel that she treats your brother better
and loves him more.
You need to talk to her calmly and in a mature
way. Explain to her that you do not necessarily
want to be favoured but rather to be treated well.
Show her that you appreciate the things she has
done for you already like caring for you. Explain
to her politely that you feel she is giving your
younger brother more attention and you feel lonely
and unloved. Most likely, she is not aware of your
feelings but if she has a reason for paying more
attention to your brother, she will explain it to you.
You will surely get to understand her actions when
you communicate. Also, remember that parents
tend to give more attention to younger children.
They tend to spoil them and they get away with
things that they would punish you for simply
because being older, they expect you to set a good
example to the others.
Email your questions to yn@nation.co.ke
or egitonga@nation.co.ke
Or send to Auntie Liz, Young Nation,
Box 49010, 00100, Nairobi