SUNDAY NATION September 6, 2009

nine years are hooked to pornography

By DANIEL WESANGULA
and JOHN MAKENI
Some unscrupulous backstreet fi lmmakers
who have been churning out potboilers
have turned to shooting pornographic
fi lms.
They are producing DVDs in local languages
which are on sale in all major
towns in the country.
As a result, religious leaders are up in
arms saying the DVDs are eroding young
people’s morals.
Traditionally, public discussion of sex
has generally been taboo, but the subject
has been turned into a profi table trade
under the noses of law enforcement offi -
cials who have either been compromised
to look the other way or are overwhelmed
by the sheer volumes.
Although sale of pornographic DVDs
is illegal under Kenyan law, the fi lms are
on sale in public places at between Sh500
and Sh2,000.
Men and women, some as young as 17
years, have been lured into the business
with the promise of acting or modelling
careers, the Sunday Nation has established.
They earn between Sh5,000 and
Sh45,000 to engage in sex on camera.
According to a report commissioned by
the ministry of Finance, the Kenyan fi lm
industry is worth about Sh4 billion, and it
employs about 15,000 people. A sizeable
number of these are in the pornography
business.
Increasing openness
Sociologists link the increase in demand
for pornography to many factors, including
the increasing openness of the Kenyan
society.
“Social change is occurring all over the
world and we in Kenya will not be exempted,”
said John Murimi, a sociologist at the
University of Nairobi. “What matters is
how we handle this new-found freedom.”
But the clergy are very concerned about
the trend.
“The tolerance of such materials shows
only one thing — that people cannot exercise
self-control. We have let ourselves
down both physically and spiritually,” said
Father Francis Mbuthia, a Roman Catholic
priest at the Holy Family Basilica. “I am
particularly fearful for the future of the
youth. If this continues, where will we be
in a few generations?”
Fr Mbuthia said that if the spread of
pornography goes unchecked, the country
might be facing a “spiritual breakdown”.
Investigations by the Sunday Nation
found that some strip joints that once
passed themselves off as massage parlours
have moved to the suburbs and revised
their menu to include pornography.
An owner of one of these “parlours” told
the Sunday Nation that for the right price
— Sh2,000 for one girl and Sh5,000 for
fi ve — a client can “rent” the number of
women he wants for an agreed duration
But if video cameras are involved, an additional
fee has to be negotiated with both
the owner and the girl or girls.
Besides operating as brothels, many of
the “massage parlours” are also production
sites for pornographic videos.
They are located in Karen and Kitisuru
as well as in Komarock, Buru Buru,
Umoja, Ngara and in River Road in downtown
Nairobi.
According to our sources, earnings for
an actor in a local pornographic fi lm depend
on the length of the video or the
nature of the acts, which can even involve
animals. The naive earn as little as
Sh5,000 per fi lm.
Although HIV/Aids spread is on the increase
locally, safe sex is not a central feature
in these fi lms, and actors are seldom
asked about their HIV status.
One source, who requested anonymity
to protect her four-year-old son from
knowing what she does for a living, said
she does it because, with her secondary
school education, this is the only job that
can provide a livelihood for her and her
children.
Working in brothels is not the only way
young women are lured into the pornography
industry.
Investigations have shown that some
so-called movie casting agencies operate
as briefcase modelling agencies that exist
for the sole purpose of furnishing recruit
actors for the illegal fi lms.
The agencies then create groups on social
networking sites where models and
actors are updated on dates and types
of upcoming projects and the money involved.
Marketing the fi lms involves mass market
tactics such as distributing fl yers and
putting posters in back streets which, according
to the Nairobi City Council Licensing
Department, is illegal.
“It is against the law for anyone to paste
posters of any nature on walls in the city
since we do not provide licences for such
kind of advertising,” said David Gatimu,
the assistant director for urban planning
and development at the Nairobi City
Council.
Although the Kenya Film Censorship
Board operates under legislation adopted
by the colonial government, it says it will
win the war against indecency. But this
could be a tall order for the parastatal
since the porn kings have moved into cyberspace
where the board may have limited
powers.
Through M-Pesa
One Internet site allows the client to select
a DVD, pay through M-Pesa and the item
is delivered within minutes, in addition to
qualifying for “bonus points”.
The chief executive of the censorship
board David Pkosing admitted that some
of the people in the porn movie business
appear to be untouchable by the police or
other law enforcement agencies.
“We are not short-handed. Provided the
amendments we have recommended for
our current Act are made, the producers,
consumers and distributors of these fi lms
will be apprehended,” he said.
“As a board we cannot do much because
the laws are specifi c, and we are only entitled
to deal with the fi nal product: the
exhibitors. Pornography is a serious issue
in this country, and the law should be
amended to give the board monitoring
power besides dealing with exhibitors,”
he added.