Wednesday April 15, 2009

By COSMAS BUTUNYI
and GATONYE GATHURA
Kenya’s foremost medical research
institute is facing severe cutbacks
as donors hold back funding following
allegations of corruption.
Donors are said to have lost confi dence
in the Kenya Medical Research Institute
(Kemri), with some withholding funds or
demanding control of cash management.
A senior officer at head office said a
major donor wants to have more say in vetting
personnel and handling procurement.
One of the premier medical research centres
in Africa, Kemri has been embroiled in
corruption claims for more than a decade.
Founding director Davy Koech was suspended
two years ago to allow inspection
into alleged loss of millions of shillings.
Investigations into the alleged loss of
funds amounting to more than Sh476 million,
some of it belonging to a major international
partner, the US Centers for Disease
Control, are about to be completed by Kenya
Anti-Corruption Commission, according to
Public Health minister Beth Mugo.
When contacted, the CDC offi ce in Kisumu
said they had no issues with Kemri
D O N O R R E L AT I O N S
Kemri faces funding crisis
and their programmes were on course.
Withholding of funds could aff ect research
on malaria vaccines, child diarrhoea,
drug-resistant TB, HIV and Aids and a host
of other studies being carried out in its 10
centres of “excellence”. Several studies at
Kemri have been served with withdrawal
notices by supporting organisations.
At Kisian station in Kisumu, several
studies, whose funding runs into millions
of shillings, risk stalling. In and around Kisumu,
the institute runs several studies in
HIV, malaria, bilharzia and tuberculosis all
funded by various organisations.
Other partners include the US Walter
Reed Military University and UK’s Welcome
Trust which partners in several major programmes
at the Coast Province.
Japan International Cooperation Agency,
a former major partner, has since pulled out
after ending programmes that have been
taken over by other Japanese interests.
The recent expose on Kemri’s staff pension
fund has caused donors discomfort. A
source at one of the outreach centres says
of immediate concern are grants worth
$200,000 (Sh16 million) covering HIV, bilharzia
and malaria work. “Our fears are that
if one donor gives out wrong signals others
could tag along with a possible snowballing
eff ect,” the source said.
Loss of over half a billion shillings from
the personnel pension fund and some more
from an account belonging to the CDC has
caused a ‘go-slow among some donors.’
“Donors argue, if the workers’ pension
fund could be misappropriated, how about
the research grants?” the source posed.
Apart from the major institutional donors,
there are small partners who come
in for short-term studies in collaboration
with Kemri. A source at Kemri, who spoke
on condition of anonymity for fear of reprisals,
said scientists have had to write
‘comfort notes’ assuring the donors that
the issue is being addressed.
“The donors have written to us expressing
their discomfort in releasing research
grants, which are normally channelled
through Kemri accounts,” he explained.
Eff orts to get a comment from the management
was futile as the director was
said to be out of the country. Her deputy
for fi nancial and administrative issues, Dr
Patrick Orege, was also out of the country.
Possible freeze on grants is giving scientists
affi liated to Kemri sleepless nights. A
week ago, Mrs Mugo formed a new board to
look into the issues aff ecting Kemri.
Kemri head
office in Nairobi.
The prospect of
freezing research
grants is giving
many scientists
sleepless nights.
Photo/FILE