Tuesday March 10, 2009

Before sex Aids
pill trials to start

By GEOFFREY KAMADI
A new study to determine whether
a single daily pill taken before
sexual intercourse can prevent
HIV infection will be launched
among 700 virus-free women in Bondo
District, Nyanza within the next few
months.
The clinical trial, which coincides with
studies in four other African countries as
well as the US, Thailand, Peru and Ecuador,
could strengthen a growing body of
research aimed at stopping the transmission
of HIV in so-called “discordant couples”
where one partner does not have the
virus and the other one is infected.
The drug involved in the trial, Truvada,
is already registered in Kenya and being
used as an antiretroviral for people with
HIV. Truvada prevents the virus from reproducing
itself inside the cells of people
already infected. Researchers want to
discover if it can prevent infection in an
HIV-negative person who is at high risk
of exposure to the virus, as is the case in
discordant couples.
The Bondo study follows a similar initiative
being conducted among 2,000 discordant
couples in Kisumu, Thika, Eldoret
and Nairobi by the Universities of Nairobi
and Washington in the US. According to
the Kenya Aids Indicator Survey 2007
about half of infected couples are discordant.
Animal studies
According to Family Health International
(FHI), a lead organisation in the proposed
trials, animal studies have demonstrated
that using Truvada before exposure to
HIV provides significant protection to
primates that have been repeatedly exposed
to an HIV-like virus.
Dr Ogot has been involved in several
HIV studies including the relationship between
the virus and male circumcision.
According to FHI, all study participants
will be provided with standard HIV-prevention
services such as free condoms,
counselling, screening and treatment for
sexually transmitted infections.
The clinical trials will compare one
group of participants who receive the
standard prevention services plus the pill
Truvada to a second group that receives
standard prevention services plus a placebo.
A placebo is a dummy medicine containing
no active ingredients.
Participants who become infected during
the trial will receive counselling and
referrals to medical and social services.
“If they are willing, the HIV-positive
women will be monitored for disease progression
and resistance to Truvada for at
least 12 more months,” a statement from
the study researchers said.
Mr Paul Omullo, the project’s community
liaison officer, said recruiting participants
has been challenging.
“Many people think HIV/Aids is linked
to promiscuity, so participants may be
seen to be promiscuous women,” said Mr
Omullo.
“One of the key questions is whether
individuals who get infected while on
Truvada will acquire an HIV strain that is
resistant to this medicine,” says Dr Nelly
Mugo of the University of Nairobi Institute
of Tropical and Infectious Diseases.
In the study, if a person becomes infected
even after safety measures have been
observed, they will stop receiving Truvada
and researchers will closely monitor them
for possible drug resistance.
Another challenge facing the study is
that researchers still don’t know Truvada’s
effects on unborn children.
Dr Ogot says all participants will receive
contraceptives prior to and during
the study period, and pregnancy tests will
be conducted every 28 days.
“And just in case some women fall pregnant,
the study product will be discontinued
immediately. The pregnancy, as well
as the infant after being born will be monitored
closely all through,” says Dr Ogot.