October 31, 2009

To battle HIV, go for public
tests, resolve clergymen

By NATION Correspondent
Church leaders have been asked to be at
the forefront in the fi ght against HIV and
Aids by openly testing for the virus.
In a meeting held in Nairobi, the men of
the cloth expressed concern that in spite
of a high awareness rate, HIV infections
continued to rise especially among people
living in sub-Saharan countries.
Speaking during the opening of the
Churches United Against HIV and Aids
in Eastern and Southern Africa (Cuaha)
meeting, Mr Hannu Happonen said some
churches were doing a disservice to the
fi ght against the disease by carrying out
miracle healing prayers.
“In Africa, we don’t talk about sex, we
practise it...However, it is time we started
talking about sex in a bid to reverse the
trend,” he said.
Bishop Cosmos Moenga urged churches
to promote safer sex practises, especially
among their congregations. As leaders,
the clerics should be at the forefront in
reversing the rate of HIV infection, especially
among the youth.
The Evangelical Lutheran Church bishop
from Botswana urged various churches
to speak with one voice in fi ghting the disease
in their various countries.
Cuaha is a network of more than 40
churches drawn from the Anglican, Catholic,
Lutheran, Methodist, Orthodox and
Pentecostal churches in Finland and several
African countries which include Angola,
Botswana, Ethiopia, Kenya, Malawi,
Namibia, Rwanda, South Africa, Swaziland,
Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia and
Zimbabwe.
Executive director of the International
Network of Religious Leaders Association
Chabu Kangale called for concerted
eff orts among the leaders to overcome
shame, stigma, discrimination and denial
among those infected by HIV.
“These are the evil (words) some of us
use in labelling those who are living with
HIV and Aids in our midst and we need to
overcome them in order to realise gainful
inroads in the fi ght against the pandemic,”
added Mr Kangale.
A goodwill ambassador with Christian
Aid, Canon Gideon Biamugisha, urged the
church to aim to provide accurate information
on HIV to eff ectively fi ght stigma.
A Ugandan national, Canon Biamugisha
has been living with the virus for about 20
years and was among the fi rst clerics to
publicly reveal his HIV status.