DAILY NATION 02 SEP 2009

LIVING POSITIVELY
This is the diary of Asunta Wagura, a mother of two who
tested positive 20 years ago. She is the executive director of
the Kenya Network of Women with Aids (KENWA).
Always on the
receiving end

As a single HIV-positive woman,
everything about you provokes
instant suspicion

On the outside, she looked like she had it all. I’m talking
about Magdalene, a career woman in her early 40’s,
although she looks younger than that. To say she’s in good
shape would be an understatement. She has what I would have
to hit the gym for at least three years to attain!
“I’ve reached the end, please respond urgently,” she had
written in her e-mail message to me. Her words raised a red flag
and out of either fear or curiosity, I told her to come straight
over so I could hear her story.
I didn’t really need any rehearsing. Dealing with people and
life issues has become such a big part of my life that I can handle
just about anything without referring to any research. But I
must confess I was totally unprepared for whatever Magdalene
dropped as her source of concern: “Asunta I’m ugly and people
don’t like me!”
Now I’ve dealt with some ugly experiences as far as HIV is
concerned, but I have never had to deal with someone who
believes she’s ugly. And not because she has HIV…
“I’m 42 and have no baby,” Magdalene moaned. “Women
treat me suspiciously, as if I’ll snatch their husbands. I live alone.
I dress expensively, yet no one notices me. I even gave myself
time to get noticed by the right man, even the ugliest one – I’m
no longer particular – but a recent experience calls for me to act
real fast.”
Magdalene narrated how tired she felt as she left work
one evening. Once she got home, she called a little girl – the
daughter of a neighbour – wanting to send her to buy a packet
of milk and some painkillers for a headache But before the child
could come, her mother was on Magdalene’s doorstep, wagging
a warning finger.
“Give birth to your own child and experience the pain of
labour. You can’t keep sending other women’s children to
the shops. Am I clear?” the enraged mother had screamed.
The woman went on to shout to whoever cared to listen that
Magdalene had avoided giving birth so she could maintain her
figure and continue earning millions for herself.
It was a painful incident for Magdalene considering she had
just lost her fiancé to Aids-related complications. They had had a
disagreement shortly after discovering their HIV-positive status
and it was during the brief communication breakdown that she
learnt her fiancé had committed suicide without so much as
leaving her a note.
She couldn’t face her family and friends, who had been
expecting a wedding. After the funeral, she had sold some of her
belongings, packed her clothes and moved to Nairobi where no
one knew her history. She rented a one-roomed house and was
trying to heal when her angry neighbour re-opened the wound.
I knew where Magdalene was coming from. Living as a single
mother a decade ago, I realised that single women are closely
monitored by their married neighbours. For instance, if you’re
single, no married woman will take your genuine greeting to
her husband at face value. Most will think you’re interested in a
relationship with their man. I learnt to keep off lest I was accused
– or even beaten – for allegedly stealing another woman’s man.
I once got off a matatu accompanied by a man who was
attending the same IT course as me. We were excitedly
discussing the exam we had just sat when, straight out of the
blue, a woman started raining blows, kicks and insults on me. I
don’t fight – not because I never have reasons to, but any time I
have tried I end up being beaten to a pulp. So I resolved at a very
early age never to get involved in a fight no matter how bad the
provocation.
The woman accused me of being a prostitute who couldn’t
look for her own man; rather, I was an expert at hooking those
already attached. She used an illustration of me fishing in the
basket instead of the lake. I remember my son, Peter, witnessing
the scene miserably, as other women joined in, baying for my
blood. But one thing this woman didn’t know was that I was HIVinfected
and had more than enough on my plate to consider sex
a priority in my life.
Folks don’t know the half of it, but there are many types
of stigma that go unnoticed. In the African society, a woman
who has no child of her own is treated differently with no one
bothering to find out whether it is out of decision or fate. Even
when it is the man with the problem, the buck usually stops
with her. But with HIV, if a woman chooses not to give birth, her
decision should be respected.
asuntawagura@hotmail.com