DAILY NATION
WEDNESDAY SEPTEMBER 16, 2009

LIVING POSITIVELY
This is the diary of Asunta Wagura, a mother of two
who tested positive 20 years ago. She is the executive
director of the Kenya Network of Women with Aids
(KENWA).
Recalling how Peter
came into my life
Today is my son Peter’s 19th birthday. Before that
fateful Sunday when Peter came into my life, I had
a series of terrible heartbreaks. Six months after I
hadn’t died within the “grace period”, I went to confront
Jimmy, my boyfriend (and first love) who infected me
with HIV. It wasn’t hard to find him. He sensed that I had
a burning issue, so, after lukewarm greetings, we silently
headed for the café where we used to meet as lovers.
“Why did you give me Aids?” I snapped. “Why did you
sentence me to death? Why did you do this to me?” He
looked at me in manner to suggest that I had only myself
to blame.
“What exactly do you mean?”
“You’re killing me with Aids, and I’m not going
anywhere. I’ll follow you and die in your hands so you can
bear the burden of burying me. Nobody wants me.” With
that, we left for his two-bedroom house.
“I don’t understand women,” he told me that night as
he cuddled me. “You come out of the blue and accuse me
of having given you Aids? If I had given you Aids, wouldn’t
I have died within six months? And, surely, do I look like
someone who has Aids?”
I swallowed his bait line, hook and sinker. Before I
answered, he showered me with hot kisses all over and we
got intimate. I forgot all about Aids and dying. One thing
led to another and by midnight, he was swearing how
badly he’d missed me. “Forget about the matron and her
Aids,” he said. “If you’ll consider giving me a child, I’ll take
you to college.”
With that promiseabout college, my heart melted. But
our happiness was short-lived. A couple of months after
I conceived and went to the ante-natal clinic, my HIVpositive
status was reconfirmed. “He’ll ‘see’ me,” I swore.
But this time he was well-prepared. “You were told you’re
HIV-infected. What did you expect? You thought by staying
and sleeping with me the virus would be wiped out? If you
want to abort, here’s 10,000 shillings. And if you don’t
want to live with me, you can quit.” I didn’t want to ‘quit’,
because, where would I go? Sad, but I still needed the devil.
The next morning, I tried to mend fences because, in my
view, the buck stopped with me. So I agreed that we’d go
to Eastleigh and get rid of the baby. At the clinic, which
smelt of death, we found three other depressed clients
waiting to procure abortions.
“Is this the same Jimmy who promised to take me to
college if I carried his child?” I kept wondering, but I didn’t
dare ask lest I ‘messed up’ again. “Meet me in town after
you’ve ‘finished with the small procedure’,” he told me
impatiently.
As I awaited my turn, I chewed the cud. “Suppose I
survive HIV, and because of what I’m about to do I fail
to conceive another baby, how will I face the world?” I
thought. I signalled the client behind me to go in and I
changed my mind.
I left the clinic and headed straight to River Road, where
I bought baby clothes with the money he’d given me. “He’ll
understand that I made a wise decision,” I reasoned.
“I know women are strange, but you’re the strangest,”
Jimmy remarked when I told him what I’d done. “I can see
this relationship isn’t going to work.”
“He’ll cool off by morning,” I thought. But in the
morning, Jimmy left for work earlier than usual and left me
in bed. When I got up, I realised that he had carried most
of his belongings.
Come delivery day, I went to the nearest public hospital.
I had carried the ante-natal clinic card, which proved
to be my undoing. The nurses at the labour ward read
my positive serostatusand abandoned me. None of them
would come near me, so I screamed and cursed until
3 a.m. when my son was born. He arrived with what I
needed most; a season of renewal. I would bear pain and
ridicule because of him. As I wrapped him with my khanga,
I felt some inner peace and healing. I even forgot that I
had Aids.
“I’ll forgive them and move on as long as nothing can
take my Peter away. I just don’t care … I must live,” I swore.
It’s 19 years since that day. Peter changed my attitude
towards life and my view of HIV. And I decided I’d live, even
if only for him.
Happy birthday, Peter.
My son changed my attitude
towards life and my view of HIV