DAILY NATION
WEDNESDAY NOVEMBER 4, 2009

Peter is a unique case study in
hoping against hope

My son, Peter, is among the more than
300,000 Form Four students sitting for the
Kenya Certificate of Secondary Education
examinations this year. As I escorted him
back to school the last time he came home, I could see
he had high hopes for the future. I didn’t want to appear
pessimistic, but I wanted to tell him that it’s always good
to look at life with an open mind. Exams shouldn’t be the
be all and end all.
When we read the statistics — that is, 300,000-plus
students doing exams annually — it’s hard to place a
face. But looking at Peter, I don’t feel like he is just a
number. He is struggle personified.
Peter started school almost two years later than his
age mates. “Like me, he’s HIV-infected and will be dying
any time so what’s the point of taking him to school?” I
reasoned at the time. But neither of us died and before I
knew it, Peter was the only child who remained at home
after all the neighbouring children had gone to school.
It was then that “sneaked” him into a nearby school. As
I enrolled him, I prayed the headmistress would never
know about my HIV status. As it is, some neighbours
believed I was “dying of Aids” rather than “living with
HIV” as we say nowadays.
“My friends have refused to play with me because their
parents have warned them that I’m dying of Aids just like
my mother,” my tearful son told me one day.
I swallowed hard.
“They say we’re thin like people with Aids.”
True, we were thin and miserable — from the stress,
pain, stigma, hide-and-seek game and hate.
“There’s a big difference between HIV and Aids,” I tried
to educate Peter.
“Mum, are we going to die?”
“Although I... we... have HIV, we’re not going to die
immediately,” I replied, almost echoing the matron who
had told me I had six months to live after I tested HIVpositive.
“Death is an equal reaper. Besides, a person
living with HIV might die of causes other than Aids.”
There were other questions I couldn’t answer, like how
I got infected HIV and why “we” had Aids while the other
children and their mothers didn’t.
I don’t know how much Peter understood, but
after this he was able to handle the issues more
knowledgeably. Plus, I was always there, ready to
separate the facts from the myths.
“The neighbours are a bit malicious; your friends can’t
be infected just by playing with you,” I counselled him
whenever he was treated like a pariah.
“Surely, if Peter is actually HIV-positive, why can’t
these mothers also consider my son’s welfare?” I
wondered. “And what about the other infected and
affected children that these mothers don’t know about?
I don’t know how the school headmistress learnt
about my status but she summoned me to school early
one morning. As I sat on the cold office bench waiting, I
sensed it had everything to do with my HIV status.
“How long will this demon haunt me?” I moaned. “Isn’t
there an escape route? I regret the day I fell in love. God,
Peter doesn’t deserve this.”
“Mama Peter, I’m sorry we can’t keep your son in this
school because we are a profit-making institution,” the
headmistress dropped the bombshell. “If other parents
know of your HIV status, they’ll withdraw their children
and I’ll have no business. Please look for another school.”
With that, she set the precedent for the next three
schools: they all denied Peter entry. Just as I was losing
hope, the fourth school accepted him, and that’s where
Peter completed primary school.
That’s why I believe Peter isn’t just another statistic.
He’s a unique case study in hoping against hope. And I
know thousands of other candidates have their individual
stories of struggle.
All the best, survivors.
This is the diary of Asunta Wagura, a mother of two
who tested positive more than 20 years ago. She is the
executive director of the Kenya Network of Women
with Aids (KENWA).