DAILY NATION Wednesday December 2, 2009

Waiting for the results for Peter’s
HIV test was a real nightmare

LIVING POSITIVELY
This is the diary of Asunta Wagura, a mother of two who
tested positive 20 years ago. She is the executive director
of the Kenya Network of Women with Aids (KENWA).
The longest emotional
journey of my life
After being rejected by several schools, Peter finally
found one with a more accommodating headmistress.
I was at peace; at least nobody in the school was
bothered about our HIV status. But I still hated the nosy
neighbours who kept making insinuations about Peter’s HIV
status. And for some years I buried my head in the sand like
an ostrich, hoping my son was HIV-negative.
I hadn’t had Peter tested, and I didn’t have the courage
to do it. I simply hoped that God had spared him the HIV
infection. But my faith and hope were stretched to the limit
after he did his Standard Eight exams and was due for
circumcision, as is the custom in my community.
“When are you going to organise Peter’s tea?” women
from my village started asking, which is a polite way of
asking when a boy will “face the knife”.
Unknown to them, the subject freaked me out. Peter
wasn’t mine alone anymore. I wished I had the sole right
to Peter because I would have said a straight “no” but the
pressure was piling, and I needed the courage to face up to
my worst fear.
“I’m caught between a rock and a hard place,” I confided
in a good friend. “And this is driving me nuts.”
“But your knowing or not knowing Peter’s HIV status
doesn’t change it,” my friend gave me the cold, harsh facts.
“In fact, if you make an effort to know it, you’ll make an
informed decision as to whether to proceed with the cut.”
The next step was, of course, tackling Peter. Earlier
on, telling him about HIV, Aids and death was easier
than what I was now facing. When it came to whether
or not he was infected, I found that I wasn’t really strong
enough to handle the matter. Each time he asked another
question, I panicked. I had started by re-telling him how
HIV is transmitted, with emphasis on mother-to-child
transmission and why I now wanted him tested for the virus.
“So is it true that I have Aids like the neighbours are
saying?”
“That’s why this test is important, Peter.”
“Will I take the same drugs you’re taking?”
“We’ll know that only after you have been tested. We’ll
cross that bridge when we come to it. I’m sure everything
will be okay.”
“And will I complete school now that I have Aids?”
“You’ll complete school. And, Peter, you don’t have Aids.
What I mean is, we need to establish whether you have the
virus that causes Aids. There’s a big difference between HIV
and Aids.”
“So, Mum, you don’t have Aids?”
“That’s right. I’m living with HIV.”
Since I tested HIV-positive, I’ve had many of what I refer
to as “what if?” moments. And as I drove along Ngong Road
taking Peter for an HIV test that morning, I had a trillion
of “what ifs?” zooming through my mind. Several times I
almost made a U-turn and drove back home.
With Peter in the passenger’s seat, I tried to play it cool,
like it was just another ordinary test. But my emotions
were all over the place. Although it was approximately a
20-minute journey, emotionally, it is one of the longest road
trips I’ve ever taken.
Peter was tested and we got the results in three hours,
during which I went through hell.
“Finally, I can heave a sigh of relief,” I told myself when the
test came back negative.
“For now, we’ve only confirmed that you didn’t get HIV
from me, which is the best news I’ve heard in a long while,” I
gave Peter an impromptu post-test counselling.
“But that doesn’t mean you’re immune to HIV infection.
Take care. Your future is in your hands now.”
I was relieved that he wasn’t infected, but I’ve been
in this business long enough to know that one fling, one
momentary lapse in judgement, is all it takes to make one
sero-positive. The biggest relief would be to know that Mr
and Mrs Peter Kanyi, and the generations after that, won’t
go through the stuff I went through. It’s my prayer that
today, as we concentrate on fighting this virus, my children
will live in an HIV-free society. This is one of the best gifts we
can bequeath future generations.
asuntawagura@hotmail.com