DAILY NATION Wednesday December 9, 2009

Rosalid’s* e-mail was brief and ominous: “Asunta, please call
me urgently, or else …” She had given her phone number. I
didn’t want to take chances so I called her immediately.
“What I’m going through … unless you help me, I’m going to
kill myself and the baby I’m carrying,” she said.
“Please come to our office and I’ll personally see you.”
“So when did you know you were infected …?” I blurted out
when she arrived.
“No, it has nothing to do with HIV,” she didn’t even let me
finish the question. “But I’d rather deal with HIV than what I’m
going through.”
You see, owing to my own situation and my life’s work, I tend
to think that all the most serious, life-threatening issues have
everything to do with HIV.
“My husband and I separated after a domestic spat. I moved
out with our kid. Of course, I knew we’d return to him, but I
wanted to teach him a lesson.”
Apparently, Rosalid was prepared to make her marriage
work, so after work, she would go to her local priest, who was
extremely supportive, for marital counselling. One evening after
the session, the priest asked her to accompany him to see a
friend. “Since I was doing nothing, I decided to accompany him
and before long, we arrived at a party,” she said.
“And?”
“One thing led to the other. We drank wine and I don’t
remember how I ended in my bed with a priest.”
My jaw dropped. A priest, of all people? Then, remembering
that I should never judge a client, I straightened my face.
Speaking of judging, I’ve also been caught up in compromising
situations and almost succumbed to sex-related temptations.
I’m no angel. At one time a platonic relationship with a member
of the opposite sex almost went too far, and I could feel myself
losing control. But I was saved in the nick of time by the small,
insistent voice that warned me of the possible consequences: reinfection
with HIV, an unplanned pregnancy, a broken heart.
“And it’s that one-night stand that resulted in this pregnancy.
I informed the priest about it, but he advised me to get rid of it
before his church got to know about it,” Rosalid continued.
Call it fate but while all this was happening, she happened to
read my pro-life article, in which I said that nobody should take
an unborn baby’s life.
“Asunta, I knew I had to see you because I think you’re a
godsend.”
She wanted me to tell her what to do because she had
reconciled with her husband and intended to return home. Now,
I don’t know whether the advice I gave her was professional
or motivated by plain emotion because I told her that the first
priority was the life forming inside her.
“This life isn’t responsible for the circumstances that led to its
conception, but God has put you in a position to decide its fate.”
“Are you advising me to carry this pregnancy to term? What
about my marriage?” she asked
“Who knows what you’re carrying? You and your husband
are going to be reunited through mutual consent, but the baby
you’re carrying is your flesh and blood. Live with it.”
At this point I could see that Rosalid had changed her mind.
She didn’t even let me finish my counselling-cum-sermon.
“No matter what, I’ll keep the baby. It’s mine,” she said with
conviction, although I knew that the road ahead would be rough
for her.
I’ve talked to women who have had abortions and one thing
they all tell me is that they’ve never been able to forget. And
it’s even worse for those who find they cannot have children
later – when they want them – because of abortion-related
complications.
However, this isn’t just about one unfortunate woman’s
marriage on the rocks, unplanned pregnancy and abortion. It’s
about the foreseen and unforeseen consequences of our sexual
behaviour. Rosalid was so anxious about being pregnant that I
doubt she had stopped to think that she might have got infected
with HIV. HIV is no respecter of persons, and I have friends
among the clergy who are living with HIV and who, if “one thing
led to another”, could end up infecting their partners.
And then there’s the issue of protection. Rosalid isn’t alone. A
good number of sisters nowadays use emergency contraceptive
pills – forgoing safer sex options – yet the former cannot protect
them against sexually transmitted infections. Is it just me, or is
HIV slowly being relegated to the back burner?