DAILY NATION

WEDNESDAY JUNE 17, 2009

How I wish he were still here so
he could see how far I’ve come

LIVING POSITIVELY
This is the diary of Asunta Wagura, a mother of two who
tested positive 20 years ago. She is the executive director of
the Kenya Network of Women with Aids (KENWA).
It’s been 22 years since my father passed away and I still
don’t have words to describe the emptiness left by his death.
I was reminded of him last week when a girl came to see
me in my office, accompanied by her father. I was green with
envy as daughter introduced dad. The girl wanted her father to
witness as she made a donation to KENWA. You can’t imagine
how much this made me miss you, Dad. I wished you could
have stood beside me too.
The incident made me think of the role fathers play in our
lives, even though we sometimes take them for granted.
In particular I remembered how you always cheered me
on whenever I was on the verge of giving up. It was your
encouragement that fuelled and accelerated me towards my
dreams.
The reason I don’t give up easily now is because you taught
me that the only thing to do when everything fails is to try
again. I have applied this all along, and it works. But when I try
to tell my son, Peter, the same, he looks at me as if I’m from the
Stone Age. I’m sure with time he will come to appreciate that
nothing good comes easily.
Pretty tough
Dad, things have been pretty tough. Insecurity is increasing by
the day. Recently there was a massacre in Mathira, where your
grandfather came from. In one incident, the killers hacked a
woman as TV cameras rolled, and dared anyone to take her to
hospital.
That was very painful for me because I’ve seen HIV-related
illnesses take parents away from children. I never imagined
anybody in their right mind would want to add to the statistics
of orphans. I didn’t sleep that night. I remembered how it was
hard losing you even as we prayed for a miracle.
Dad, a lot of things have changed: some good, others not
so good. Can you imagine we now buy sugar at more than
10 times the price it was when you were still with us? It has
become very hard for the common man to fit in today’s
economy.
Maize flour, among other things, has reached prices that
were hard to even imagine. The people I serve can’t afford two
square meals a day. And without food, they’re as good as dead
because this virus requires good nutrition, plus drugs and a
sound social support system, to keep it at bay.
Back to college
The good news is I went to back to college. And I was reading
the other day that the price of a hamburger – which one can
wolf down in five minutes flat – is £1.5. That’s about Sh190,
and in Kenya it takes 38 hours to earn that amount of money!
Do you think my two sons and I will survive this, Dad?
It’s hard, especially for people living with HIV. I know I’m
100 times better, but it’s still hard to enjoy a square meal
when you know someone somewhere is starving to death, and
sometimes just next door.
Our politics have also changed a lot. For the political class,
it’s everyone for himself and God for the common person. I
wish I could tell them the hyena’s story you used to tell me.
You always concluded that no matter how greedy or hungry a
hyena is, it would never eat its own child. Meaning when you’re
a leader, no matter how greedy you are, you should never
forget those who are supposed to be serving.
I wish I could tell them, the way you used to tell us, that no
matter how hungry you are, you can only eat the capacity of
your stomach. You don’t need more than what your stomach
can carry at any given time. I wish we could all apply this and
give the surplus to the needy. And I wish I could repeat what
you used to say: “It is good to be important, but it’s even more
important to be good.”
Joshua, your namesake, is such a naughty little boy. But he
walks with stature and authority. He came into my life just
when I needed him, and every time I see him I see you in him,
and I feel encouraged. Like the girl who visited our office with
her father, I want to make you proud of me.
Peter is in Form Four now. You can’t imagine the magnitude
of pride as I wait for him to ‘clear’ high school. There was a
time when this milestone looked like a far off dream – a mirage,
even. Then, disease, discrimination and death were the order
of my day.
Dad, you’re irreplaceable, and I dedicate this Father’s Day to
you, and to all dads who love their daughters the way you loved
me.
asuntawagura@hotmail.com
Dad’s words of wisdom