DAILY NATION

WEDNESDAY AUGUST 12, 2009

LIVING POSITIVELY
Sometimes, despite your best
efforts, the body just wants to
shut down for a while
I hope this article clarifies a few issues following a number of
e-mail messages from people wanting to know how my ‘girl
project’ went. But there was one message inquiring about
something rather personal – my sex life. I’ll be honest, both issues
are in jeopardy. The other day, as I was wondering about the best
way forward, an international magazine known as Nam arrived
just in time to explain my predicament. In one of the articles, it
was said that antiretroviral drugs (ARVs) lower the sex drive of
people who have used them for extended periods.
“Anxiety and depression, bad sleep, bad sex and low selfesteem:
these are our biggest bugbears as people living with
HIV,” the article said in part. Finally I understood what was
happening to me – ARVs have affected my sex life, and this has in
turn affected my relationship with Richard. I wanted to raise the
issue with my doctor on two separate occasions but my courage
failed each time and we ended up discussing other issues, no less
important but not what had taken me there.
I still remember the way I itemised my list during my last visit.
First I told him my concentration is suffering, which is not a good
thing because I’m in the middle of studying. The only things I
read, register and never forget are things to do with HIV. Colour
me biased, but my levels of alertness rise whenever I come
across anything concerning this virus. But when it comes to other
materials, including study texts, boredom and sleep take over
within a few minutes.
“No sweat,” the doctor remarked and suggested something I
could use. I’m yet to see the results of whatever he prescribed.
Then I told him I’m really bored of having to swallow ARVs
every day. I have been popping the pills twice a day for seven
years now, and even my son, Joshua, has become familiar with
my ‘drug habit’. Whenever I come home he runs to hug me then
points to the shelf where I store my ARVs and asks my foster
daughter to bring me a glass of water. At two years, Joshua has
come to accept that taking the drugs is part of Mum’s life.
“When can I begin my drug holiday?” I asked my doctor
because I felt I needed a break from ARVs. I got this idea from a
meeting I attended for people living with HIV and Aids (PLWHAs).
They said there is something called a drug holiday.
“What’s your CD4 count?” the doctor asked.
“Six hundred and something.”
Holiday thoughts
“When was the last time you had a CD4 count?”
That’s where my holiday thoughts came to a screeching halt
because it’s been more than six months since my last count.
“We can’t rely on history,” he shrugged. “Let’s do this.”
In one hour flat we had the results, which surprised me: my
count had dropped from a high of 650 to a dangerously low 347.
“What have you been doing wrong?” he prodded.
Of course, I didn’t tell him that for the last one year
– disregarding the risks of re-infection – I’ve been trying,
unsuccessfully, to conceive ‘my’ baby girl.
“My viral load is undetectable,” I said, trying to look on the
bright side, “and surely that qualifies me for a drug holiday.”
“Listen good,” he laughed, “there’s nothing like a drug holiday;
wherever you got that from, it’s misleading.”
And with that he ordered my three months’ supply of ARVs. It
was at this point that I postponed the next item on my agenda:
the downward spiral of my sex life. Plus, I felt awkward because I
knew he would put two and two together.
I never intended to bring this up, but there was nothing
better thing to do while we waited for my drugs to come from
the pharmacy. So I told him I’m extremely worried because the
hump on my back – lipodystrophy in medical lingo – seems to
be growing bigger by the day. My legs are also looking thinner,
although it’s not as if I want to show them off – I kissed miniskirts
goodbye years ago. But I was hoping if I took a drug holiday,
I could at least ‘get my sexy back’, somehow. The doctor was
unmoved by my new approach to ARVs, my body image issues or
any of the debilitating side effects I listed for him.
“Asunta, what I’m worried about right now is your CD4 count.
Not your hump or thin legs. Those can wait. There’s no need to
remind you what a drop in your CD4 count can do to you.”
I dropped the matter. My drugs had arrived and I was happy to
hurriedly exit as I agreed to check my CD4 every three months
instead of six. Maybe I’m pushing the envelope a bit here, but all I
know is that my whole system is screaming for a holiday.
asuntawagura@hotmail.com
Sorely in need of
drug-free holiday