DAILY NATION
NOT WITCHCRAFT BUT HIV

Unfortunately, some prefer to
believe a positive test result has
to do with the supernatural

LIVING POSITIVELY
This is the diary of Asunta Wagura, a mother of two who
tested positive 20 years ago. She is the executive director of
the Kenya Network of Women with Aids (KENWA).
When I tested HIV positive, I would have preferred to
hear anything else but that I had been infected with a
virus associated with an immoral lifestyle. Had I been
told I was bewitched, I would have more readily accepted the
verdict. It was the lesser of two evils.
In the early days of HIV, some people believed people living
with HIV were bewitched. That’s because they didn’t know how
else to explain this ogre except to fall back on what was more
familiar to them. Such cases are now isolated thanks to the
increased level of awareness concerning this virus. As a result,
many people have come out of their ignorance cocoons.
Even though I knew what was ‘eating’ me up back then,
there were times when my mind played tricks on me. I couldn’t
understand why, of all people, it had to be me infected with
HIV. I thought there must be a human hand behind my
predicament and I nearly lost my mind. Something like this had
never happened in our family. In fact, I was the first person to
be HIV infected where we lived and people came from far and
wide to see me, although they kept a safe distance.
No support groups
The fact that there were no support groups then didn’t make
things any easier. The churches treated people living with
HIV like modern day lepers. Feeling they had no other option,
some of my friends ran to witchdoctors, who took advantage
of them. These were desperate folks, and because of the ill
treatment they had received from society, they preferred to
swallow whatever a witchdoctor told them. But it turned out
that what they thought was light at the end of the tunnel was
actually the headlights of a fast-approaching train.
I thank God that in the nick of time I met people who were
living positively, otherwise I would be a statistic by now.
Because when one starts saying they’re bewitched – yet there’s
an HIV test to prove otherwise – they are standing on the edge
of a cliff and a small gust of wind is enough to push them to
their deaths.
A reader recently wrote to me detailing her predicament
and asking me for help. She’s the eldest of three children and
their mother tested HIV-positive in early 2007. She said their
world turned upside down, first as her mother refused to take
life-prolonging antiretroviral drugs once she learnt her CD4
count was low. Fortunately, later in the year she started taking
the drugs. Although she was born and baptised a Catholic, she
became a member of another church after testing positive.
Then her new church convinced her that she had been
bewitched.
“Now our mother doesn’t get along with anyone, not even
her own mother,” the girl said. “She reads Bible verses and
tries to convince anyone willing to listen that she has been
bewitched by me, my aunts, my grandma, anybody. I look at
her and wonder what happened to the mother who was always
happy and outgoing. I wish God would change things for us.”
Right information
When someone living with HIV starts saying they’re bewitched
– and they keep saying it no matter what – it means they need
help. It means they’ve been misinformed and need to get the
right information. If we are to win this war, we have to tell
people the truth. We must tell them that HIV infection doesn’t
mean death.
We have to tell them that there’s life after sero-conversion;
that this condition can be managed and allow one to go on
with one’s life. I am a witness, after all. I too, once stood on
the precipice and had a choice to believe what my friends
who were living positively told me, or that my situation had
something to do with witchcraft.
It’s very easy to go with whatever is convenient, whatever
has less stress and stigma attached to it. The tag of HIV
positive _______ (put your name in the space) does that to
some, especially if there is no firm foundation based on sound
knowledge. The label makes one want to run and hide from the
truth, because this particular truth is ‘dirty’ and it hurts.
I don’t know whether witchcraft exists or not, but I do
know HIV exists, although I can’t get into the whole science
behind it. I believe what the researchers and doctors tell me
because their methodologies are concrete and follow laid
down international guidelines. Knowing and accepting the
truth has set me free: free to live and experience the wondrous
opportunities life has in store for me.
asuntawagura@hotmail.com
Not witchcraft but HIV