{"text": "MONDAY, JULY 3, 1995\nPaying dearly for cultural sovereignty\nBy KIBIBU-BABATESI\u2028\n A recent seminar in Nairobi was told by African manager of public broadcasting stations that Governments should pump more money into these Citation to enable them compete in an environment of rapid do-regulation of broadcast media. W5at who being advocated wan increased control of broadcast media through financing.\u2028\n Faced with a dwindling revenue base due to adjustments and the denim to maintain control of propaganda channels, government have worked out a way to achieve both at the opener of cultural sovereignty and without necessarily liberalizing. \n\nWithout saying why, in the case of KBC, the need for revenue is sited as reason for M-Net \u201crental\u2019 of KBC extra channels. No one in convincing on why KBC cannot collect enough revenue through\u00b7 existing monopoly services. And nobody wants to tell why local entrepreneurs were not invited to bid for the KBC M-Net deal\u00b7 Even so, Why have\n\nFour TV channels. Transmitting almost similar material and expect payment? Or is KBC channel going whole local soon? Given events in other African countries, we can hazard. A guess it seems to matter not that what is being transmitted is. Foreign and de-regulation is cosmetic, as10ng as\u00b7 we are seen to be \"liberalizing\". \n\nViewers of the very educative, Your Security against Aids (Tuesday 9.30 pm) sponsored by NSSF and recorded at KIE probably believe the programme is off air due to a hitch in the way it . Man, Dr Sobbie Mulindi. The ended. However, the programme most touching hit was the test is still on tomorrow at 9.30 pm. money of the late Lydia Wangeci. The programme has run for 13 there was a healthy Wangeci episodes and is probably one of preaching Aids awareness at a most popular on KBC TV. Public gathering in December that almost everyone was rep- 1990. Six months later, an emaciated from government,  Wangeci, unable to stand, media practitioners, students, had a clear message \"Do you remember me?\" youth, workers, lawyers, counsellors, the Church, to testimonies. This project by NSSF must by infected persons, shows the continue after the four remaining well organized and balanced pre- .episodes. Data provided by the sensation and resource of anchor- director of medical services, Dr. Henry Mwanzia and the WHO representative, Dr .Paul. Chuke justify the continuation of the programme.\nIn 1994, the world had .18 million infected and one million full blown HIV-positive cases. Three million cases are suspects. Half a million full-blown HIV cases are children of the one million sufferers, 300,000 cases. Kenya accounts for 55,000 full blown Aids\nPatients. In short, Kenyans cannot afford to be lethargic. Aids should not be the preserve of the National Aids Control Council or the Ministry of Health. If Ministers for Health, Culture and Social Services, and Labour - as I am told - will be on it soon, that is a good beginning. Aids awareness campaigns has knocked sense into some irresponsible heads. On May 22, 1995 the radio General Service fell silent School broadcast slots. Reason? KBC had increased what KIE pays them for school broadcasts from Sh2.6 mill year to Sh4.5 a term! KIE' not pay and KBC would not only after promissory letter Ministerial level did KBC rest schools broadcasts.\n\nThe KIE schools programme saga is just the extreme of what damage can be done due to lack of clear management policy.  There are more locally produced video films with' KIE, NGOs and other educational institutions that KBC would not \u201ctouch for no other reason other than KBC wants to be paid to buy foreign films!"}