{"text": "Foundation declares war against Aids\nWith the catastrophic development of Aids and man's powerlessness against it, ten years after discovering the virus, Luc Montagriier has set up a World Foundation aimed at waging allout war against the terrible disease.\n\u201cThis is just the beginning. The worst is yet to come\" warned headline in a French magazine.\nEverybody agrees on this matter and not a day goes by without the subject coming up.\nIt is true that Aids is everywhere. The famous French film festival - \"La Nuit des Cesars\" - at which the best -actors and the best films of the year are given awards, has gone into mourning.\nIt was dedicated to Cyril Collard, a 35 year-old progidy filmmaker who died from Aids two days before the prize-giving ceremony.\nIt was on television in front of thousands of people and it is art understatement to say that public opinion is becoming somewhat astounded and panicking with the advance of the epidemic which appears unavoidable.\nMore and more television programmes, involving the public, and news reports show what is happening in France and abroad in the USA, In Africa and in Asia, how to protect oneself, the action of the Aids Association for those who are already infected and the validity of HIV tests.\nSo in 1983, ten years after the discovery of the fearful HIV virus, nothing has been achieved. No progress has been made. On the contrary, HIV-virus carriers who did not actually have Aids and who, until 1985, were thought to be spared by the disease, have now turned out to be irrevocably condemned in the shorter or longer term.\nLuc\u00b7Montagnier, who had discovered the virus, feels very badly about the situation of the powerlessness of science against the very rapid development of the scourage, which appears limitless.\nHe feels responsible. If it has been possible to find the virus, why are scientists unable to counteract it?\nFaced with the urgency of the situation, he seized the opportunity of the 10th anniversary of the discovery to fire at the virus from all sides. He thus set up a world Foundation against Aids which is to be the starting point of general mobilisation and of allout war against the virus.\n\"Ten years after the virus' has been isolated, we still have nothing serious to offer patients. We have to be faster and stronger. We have to create a motivated strike force and forestall Aids on all continents, bringing the nations of the South into the common effort,\" says Luc.\nThis requires considerable sums of money. At a pitch, a physicist can make do with a blackboard and like Einstein write out equations until he reaches the brilliant E-MC2. But biologists have to grapple with\nmatter, micro-matter, and that can be costly equipment wise. \nThe first objective of the World Foundation for Research and the Prevention of Aids known as the\nMontagnier Foundation is to raise funds to combat Aids.\n'Professor Montagnier wants to extend his effort to the whole world and set up a network of research and clinical experiment centres on all the continents.\nFrom the new laboratories that were given him, in 1988, by the Pasteur Institute where he works, he has managed, despite limited financial support of 6 million francs a year, to pose some key questions in the form of paradoxes.\nNone of the viruses related to HIV kills 100 per cent.\n\"Since 1983,I have been saying that the HIV is not responsible alone. There are probably co-factors\nInvolved in the disease,\" says the professor.\nThese co-factors would appear to be responsible for making the virus aggressive. They could be microplasms, tiny bacteria which have not drawn attention to themselves so far.\nAnother paradox is 'that the virus contaminates very few blood cells. A chemical signal, given by the infected lymphoeytes, could bring about the death of the others. If the phenomenon of the amplification of the effect of the virus were understood, it might be possible to inhibit it.\nLuc Montagnier does not content himself\u00b7 with fundamental research. He also thinks of the patients who are infected. He would like his Foundation to\u00b7 be able to at 'least offer them more relief since it is' unable to cure them.\nHe practises cell therapy which censists in taking some lymphocytes from HIV positive patients and injecting huge doses of these immunity cells back into the person at tile earliest signs of the disease's becoming active.\nAt any rate Professor Montagnier has decided to fight on to the end \u201cI will only stop when I have achieved my objective. I have no choice. Either I wait for retirement, slowly exploring the areas that interest me with the means that I am offered or I plunge into battle."}