Aids conference
Is major step
The Aid conference, which begins in Nairobi tomorrow, is
a major positive step in the war against the lethal infection
that is threatening the survival of millions of people.
The conference, to be attended by Aids sufferers as well
as people with no clinical symptoms, but who carry the
Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV), is important for
One  areas . Although 1.68 million Kenyan carry the virus,
with 34,0 0 either suffering from Aids or in the throes of
the final stages of the infection, most people still claim they
do not know, or have not heard, about anyone with the
infection. In other words, Aids is, in ·many ways, still a
closet disease .
Top officials at Afya House, the Ministry of Health
Headquarters, say the conference will - using ,the
experiences and ideas of victims, including members of the
Know Ai Society (KAS) - examine the stages of the
epidemic n Kenya.
One sure thing is that Kenyans have failed to curb the
spread of Aids and this calls for a critical analysis and
evaluation of the causes of this tragic failure.
Indeed, there are various dimensions to the problem and
very few in our in the country can escape blame. Parents
have failed to help protect their children from the infection.
Aids is, in fact, said to be rampant among teenagers.
Equally iS , our youth should no longer look for scapegoats
and the lesson is now clear. Sex outside marriage and
promiscuity are a sure way to death.
First recorded in 1984, the rapid spread of Aids is a major
indicator hat Kenyans have to seriously examine their
morals. I deed, we agree with a senior official in the
Ministry ho said that there was an urgent need to reexamine
the whole issue of morality because it has been
lacking among our leaders - politicians, religious men,
community leaders or clan leaders and even the medical
profession.
Unless the rate of spread of the killer disease is curbed _
its infection and death rate at least doubles every six
months - he country will soon be plunged into a major
disaster because Aids has major socio-economic, cultural,
legal and political implications that portend doom.
There is no doubt that an Aids test is already becoming
an important requirement for those who have been sexually
active be£ e marriage, especially if they want children.
Like all others, most of 1.68 million people infected with
HIV simply took their "chance". Even if the country's top
medical experts confess that they have been shocked and
caught unprepared by the rapid spread of the infection.
An organization like Unicef, which specializes. in
children's issues, has been forced to re-examine its
strategies or activities and seriously join the war against the
killer disease, which is wrongly assumed to affect only
sexually active adults. ,
Indeed, it is Unicefs country representative, Mr Vincent
O'Reilly, who recently warned against curbing the funding
of Aids progammes because the disease can rapidly retard
all the progress that has been made in the war against
poverty an diseases.
As parents die, leaving thousands of orphans, at least 30
per cent of children born by mothers with HIV also get
infected du . g or before birth and their. number is rapidly
increasing. Aids even hinders immunisation against
tuberculosis
There is need for strategies to help curb the killer
'disease, which afflicts seven per cent of our population and
reaches 30 per cent among some adult groups.
The KAS has done a good job in the war against Aids.
However, it is a shame that some hotels have been
discriminating against Aids sufferers, probably out of
ignorance. perhaps the Nairobi conference will help to
educate the about the spread of the virus. Employers in
Kenya definitely need training on the handling of HIV and
Aids victims.

