{"text": "Media is innocent over Obel's claim\nProf Arthur Obel blames the media for the relentless and microscopic questioning of his Aids drug called Pearl Omega. Prof Obel says he has no cure for Aids and adds that there is no such thing as a \"cure\" in the world of medicine .. What he does is treat, God heals.\nLet us begin with this last item. Even before the Aids scourge, there were such messages at mission hospitals. The aim being simply to let people visiting the hospital and patients to know that there may be medicine but at the end of the day, men and women die despite getting treatment.\nNow, if in the world of medicine there is no cure, then what is the world doing looking for a cure for Aids? What have governments of the world been doing warning that Aids is 100 per cent fatal because there is no cure? Why has every researcher been saying loudly that a cure has not been found?\nWe also know that malaria remains the world's leading killer even though there is a cure for the disease. There are diseases, of course, for which then~ are drugs which do not cure but control and some of these Prof Obel did point out at his lecture at the University of Nairobi ' s Medical School.\nHowever, the problem with Prof Obel and his Pearl Omega, just as was the case with Kemron, is that it is him who is doing things the wrong way and drawing attention to himself. First and foremost, he does not publish his findings in a medical journal and then defend his research findings among his peers. That is the done thing and Prof Obel knows it.\nProf Obel did not do what is expected of him and, instead had his findings, his so-called breakthrough, published in a local medium. It was largely from the local Press that the world learnt about Pearl Omega. That is reason enough for the world of medicine to zero in on one of their own. The next thing that would cause that are the claims on Pearl Omega.\nThe claim that then: were people who were HIV positive but had been found negative after treatment with Pearl Omega cannot be ignored especially with regard to a disease that threatens to decimate the world. People recall also that Kemron \u2013 turned out to be other what Prof Obel and Dr Davy Koech had told the world It was ..\nWhat we are saying is that the media had nothing to do with the cynicism and skepticism over Pearl Omega."}