{"text": "You must follow the\nright path, Prof Obel\nWe are wasting time, too much time, talking at each other about Pearl Omega. The point is that nobody is against the discovery by Kenya's Prof Arthur Obel of an anti-Aids drug. The fact of the matter is that everybody would like it declared officially and for all to hear that Pearl Omega is a cure for Aids and that its discoverer is a Kenyan medic.\nWhat we have said in these columns before is that Prof Obel and other doctors know that there' are ways and procedures a drug undergoes before it can be administered to patients. We have also said that Prof Obel knows the medical or scientific procedures involved before a drug is cleared for use.\nWhat is mind-boggling is that Prof Obel is skirting these procedures.\nNaturally, he draws criticism and derision for what could well be the discovery of discoveries. What is intriguing is that Prof Obel is introducing irrelevant angles to what is a very clear matter: the efficacy of Pearl Omega.\nInstead, Prof Obel locks horns with the Minister of Health; he tens the world that the Government is selling his drug and he is at loggerheads with his professional medical colleagues. The medic also claims racism is at play in medical research and, most recently, he told a Kenyatta University audience that condoms are laced with the HIV virus!\nMost Aids sufferers do not care that Prof Obel is not defending his drug scientifically, they will go for anything that offers them hope and when they hear about Pearl Omega they go for it.\nThe danger here is that the discoverer does not want to defend his drug before his peers and, therefore, the scientific world is suspicious.\nThat is the issue that should be addressed. Prof Obet knows what to do and it is scientific. What he is doing now is not scientific it is' political. ,\nKenya's politicians know everything about everything and that is why Nominated MP G.G. Kariuki says Omega's efficacy is doubted because Prof Obel is an African.\nWe are not dealing with defections and tribal politics here. Science has rules. We are saying that Prof Obel should have science and his peers prove the efficacy of Pearl Omega. How can science doubt the efficacy of Pearl Omega if it has not been a given a chance to do that?\nDo the done thing, Prof Obel. Please."}