{"text": "Daffodils could\noffer Aids drug\nA protein isolated from the roots of  bluebells\nand daffodils could hold the key to a useful Aids treatment, researchers\nsaid recently The protein, called lectin, acts as a barrier between the HIV virus that causes Aids and the immune systern cells that it targets, the team of chemists told the annual festival of' the British Association for-the Advancement of science. Our findings are a break- through but they are not the end product yet,\" Pierre Rizkallah of the: Daresbury Laboratory near Warrington in northern England told a news conference. The lectin proteins in the flower bulbs are, attracted and bind to a sugar called mannose. Mannose sugars are found in the protein envelope\nthat holds the HIV virus together and help it attack human cells. Scientists at Belgium's Leeuven University found in 1991 that lectin can\ninactivate HIV. Building on their work, Rizkallah and Colin Reynolds of Liverpool's John Moores University are trying to isolate the most effective form of lectin and describe how it works. Rizkallah said HIV looks some thing like an icosahedron, a multi- sided ball with 20 surfaces. Bits of protein stick out of this surface and some ate used to hook up to cells that the virus infects One of these is glycoprotein 120 Qr gp120, which is also ,the target of several experimental vaccines against HIV. \"It finds the target, it manages to infect the human cell and it causes' illness,\" Rizkallah said. But gp- 120 can be fooled by lectin. \"It mics the CD4 cell,\" he said. \"These proteins mimic the interaction between the HIV particle, and the immune cells. \"so if the lecin or a drog that looks like it, can be ,delivered into the immune system; it can block HIV from attacking cells. If you put lectin in between, it is obvious what happens. HIV can- not bind to the human cell,\" Rizkallah said., Although lectin is fairly easy to isolate from bluebell bulbs, the most effective form has been found in daffodils. Scientists think it is an important part of the plant's defences ,perhaps fighting off insects' that attack the plant. (Reuter) \n\nDaffodil the flower that produces' a substance from' which\nAids drug could 'be manufactured"}