Monday, December 4, 2006

Hospital struggles with
deadly new TB strain

By SARAH MCGREGOR
TUGELA FERRY (South Africa)
n a country where Aids kills 900
people each day, full hospitals
and beleaguered doctors are
nothing new.
But at one hospital in rural
KwaZulu-Natal province, what
could be a new public health nightmare
is taking its toll as doctors and nurses
grapple with a new, highly drugresistant
form of tuberculosis.
At least 74 people, including staff, at
the Church of Scotland Hospital in
Tugela Ferry have died since January
2005 after catching the drug-resistant
strain. Most were HIV-positive and their
immune systems were already weakened.
The new strain is resistant to most if
not all of the lines of defence against the
highly infectious lung disease spread
through coughing and sneezing. Left
untreated, TB attacks the lungs and can
travel to other organs, the brain and
bones.
Last week, South Africa’s health
department said 263 cases of extremely
drug-resistant TB, or XDR-TB, had been
recorded in KwaZulu-Natal, with about
30 new cases being reported each
month. Another 40 cases have been
recorded in other regions.
XDR-TB is particularly deadly for
those whose immune systems have
already been weakened by HIV/Aids —
terrible news in KwaZulu-Natal where
almost 40 per cent of the adult population
is believed to be infected with the
virus.
“Everything changed in 1990 with
Aids. We had TB under control then,
maybe 100 patients. Now we have 800,”
said the Christian-run hospital’s chief
medical officer Theo Van Der Merwe.
“With XDR-TB more people are dying.
It’s depressing because we can work
longer hours but I don’t see it slowing
down.”
The World Health Organisation said
last month the new strain could become
a major killer in Aids-hit parts of Africa
where governments have been slow to
roll out TB control programmes.
Experts say the best way to fight Aids
and TB in Africa is to overlap strategies.
But no new antibiotics have been
developed for TB in 40 years and it will
be at least 2020 before new treatments
are widely available.
Poverty and lack of resources complicate
the problem.
In KwaZulu-Natal, the well-kept
modern Church of Scotland hospital is
a stone’s throw from dilapidated shacks
where running water and reliable electricity
are luxuries and bucket toilets
are standard.
The poor residents settled in the lush
hills nearby are a target for acute diseases.
About 1.3 million of KwaZulu-
Natal’s 9.2 million people are HIVpositive.
The hospital waiting-room is packed
with patients who eke out a living as
subsistence farmers or sell small items
like single cigarettes or fresh produce
at roadside stalls.
Inside the TB ward, the windows are
wide open — fresh air makes it hard for
TB germs to stay alive — but the breeze
offers little comfort to the bedridden
and fatigued.
Dozens are kept in crowded rooms.
There are no vacancies and a waiting
list of around 50. Staff strap on surgical
masks and patients cough into cloths to
prevent spreading the illness.
Doctors and nurses are on call day and
night, stretched to breaking-point because
the hospital is short 20 medical staff and
efforts to recruit are hampered by a lack
of specialists.
“My neighbour stopped coming over to
visit. Finally she yelled (across the yard)
that she no longer wanted to sit with me
because I work with XDRs,” said Thobeka
Majola, 24, a nurse at the hospital. “I’m
scared too.”
In many ways, life has changed remarkably
little on the streets of Tugela Ferry
despite the arrival of the deadly TB strain.
Friends greet each other with outstretched
hands, huddle to chat and stroll
arm-in-arm on the town’s rutted roads.
But there are fears the disease might
not be fully understood in an area which
has lost many of its educated residents to
urban centres. “I am not 100 per cent sure
but I’ve heard that you can die from it,”
said Jaheni Majolo, 36, who tested positive
for the deadly strain and is being
treated. The mother-of-five, a widow, said
she expects to survive. Elena Jordaan, the
hospital’s chief nurse, said she cranks up
the volume in the TB ward when Zululanguage
television programmes talk
about XDR-TB in an attempt to teach sufferers.
(Reuters)