Sunday Nation/April 9, 2006

Positive and covered

sunta Wagura, the iconic activist is
familiar with the travails of HIV-positive
people trying to procure personal
finance products.
Only two years ago, a mortgage financier
guillotined her application simply because she
had no life insurance cover.
"I only succeeded after I threatened to
expose the company.
The following day, they called and gave me
the mortgage unconditionally," she says.
Yet Ms Wagura's case is not that of a lone
voice crying in the wilderness. Indeed, there
are many that simply go unheard.
Over two decades after the first case of
HIV/Aids was reported in Kenya, many of the
country's 2.2 million positive people find themselves
shut out of life insurance, and with it
many other personal finance products whose
vendors insist on one passing "the test" as a
pre-condition.
It is a saga of hypocritical denial, livid fear,
outright corporate greed, conservatism, and
most glaringly, lack of expertise among local
insurers to accurately price the HIV/Aids risk
and (surprise!) even make a profit from underwriting
it.
Ms Wagura—who is the founder of the
Kenya Network of Women Living with Aids
(Kenwa)—says she gets at least three letters
every week from members complaining against
discrimination by life insurers on the basis of
their HIV status.
"Most insurers do not provide cover to Aids
patients. They consider them high risk.
These people should not be discriminated
against when they are shopping for life insurance.
It only deepens the stigmatization," she
says.
But there is hope yet in Kenya for HIV-positive
people seeking life insurance cover.
Two firms with a South African link—
backed by years of experience in a region
which has one of the highest prevalence rates in
the world—are seeking to change this by coming
up with products that do not lock them out.
SA has six million people infected by the virus,
the highest in the world.
Pan Africa Life Assurance—the local scion
of Johannesburg-based African Life Assurance
Group (which has since been acquired by
Sanlam Limited)—has been in Kenya since
2001, following the mutation of the former Pan
African Insurance into two parts and the sale of
its life division.
But Metropolitan, the latest kid on the local
life insurance block, just launched in Kenya a
fortnight ago.
From its base on the mezzanine floor of
International Life House, CEO Linus Makhulo
talks with much conviction about its product
suite, which consists of both savings and risk
management brands.
"These are just the products that have been
chosen for our assault on the Kenyan market.
There is more where this came from.
Our Aids Solution Funder is an add-on to our
corporate products like group life cover and
group funeral cover," he said in an interview.
Since the product is sold as a form of value
added on Metropolitan's group covers, there is
an inevitable red flag: the ultimate decision as
to whether a HIV-positive person will get life
insurance or not, rests squarely with the
employer.
There is a limitation though as personal life
cover is apparently not included, shutting out
the self-employed, a sizeable crowd in this
country. And even in the case of those who
have a salaried job, it still depends on the
rather precarious magnanimity of the employer.
It is the latter to apply for the cover and
indicate that it includes the section of its workforce
that is HIV-positive, an increasingly
large portion at many firms in Kenya.
Still with changing employer perceptions
on Aids and greater hope for the same, Mr
Makhulo is convinced this product will fly.
"Most firms have adopted a policy on Aids
at the workplace. They are encouraging workers
to declare their status. Some already provide
counselling and have ARV (anti-retrovirals)
dispensing regimes.
Such companies will see our product as a
natural escalation of what they already have,"
the youthful CEO, told BusinessSunday.
But the young actuary is under no illusions
about the gravity of the job at hand. In a generally
conservative business environment,
where most prefer the tried and beaten path to
CONTINUED ON PAGE 18.