Friday December 1, 2006 

DAILY NATION
Poverty fuelling spread of Aids

Food insecurity and
malnutrition
accelerate the spread
of HIV by increasing
exposure to the virus,

writes ZIPPORAH
MUSAU
Men, money, and mobility may
have been among the main
drivers of the HIV/Aids epidemic
in its early days, but
now poverty, widespread in Africa, has
increasingly become one of the major risk
factors.
Although we have known for the past 20
years the cause of HIV infection and how
it is spread, we are only now beginning to
understand what fuels the epidemic.
Food insecurity and malnutrition accelerate
the spread of HIV, both by increasing
exposure to the virus and by increasing the
risk of infection following exposure,
according to Dr Stuart Gillespie, a senior
research fellow at the International Food
Policy Research Institute (IFPRI).
“Hunger and HIV/Aids are entwined in
a vicious cycle. Malnutrition and lack of
food heighten susceptibility to HIV exposure
and infection, while Aids in turn exacerbates
hunger,” says Dr Gillespie.
When people are short of food, they may
be forced to separate from their families to
earn a livelihood. Migrant workers are at
the heightened risk of HIV exposure and
infection, and may spread the virus when
they return home. Poor women may trade
sex to feed their families. They may also be
less able to access information about the
disease or less able to act on their knowledge
of risk to minimise HIV exposure.
Lack of proper nutrition may lead to
increased HIV transmission efficiency by
lowering immunity and compromising the
strength of stomach and genital lining.
Malnutrition among pregnant and breastfeeding
women may increase the chances
of infecting their babies.
In addition, reduced food intake and
food quality hasten the progression to fullblown
Aids among people already infected
with HIV. Studies show that weight loss of
five per cent over a period of four months,
for example, leads to opportunistic infections
and increased risk of death. Infections
are longer-lasting and more severe in
someone who is malnourished. They may
also be more frequent.
Food an important weapon
According to Dr Gillespie, links between
HIV/Aids and hunger are particularly
acute in rural communities, where households
are often dependent on agriculture
for both income and food. Improving rural
livelihoods and agricultural production
can help reduce both the spread of HIV
and the effects of Aids. He says that programmes
that reduce the need for poor
people to migrate to look for work, for
example by restoring degraded land, can
also reduce their risk of being exposed to
the virus.
As evidence of the interactions between
Aids and hunger has accumulated, both
agriculture and nutrition specialists have
begun to take Aids into account. In turn,
Aids experts have become increasingly
aware of the critical importance of nutrition,
particularly if anti-retroviral drugs
(ARVs) are to be effective.
A recent study shows that if patients are
malnourished when they start ARV therapy
they are six times more likely to die
than well-nourished patients.
They are also more likely to suffer sideeffects,
which may cause them to stop taking
the ARVs altogether. And if many people
stop, drug resistance will spread fast.
Malnutrition also increases the chances
of disease transmission between adults.
For example, Vitamin A deficiency is particularly
associated with an increased risk
of STDs, including genital ulcers and cervical
herpes simplex virus shedding, which
increase the risk of HIV transmission.
Focusing on the single premise that high
rates of HIV prevalence in Africa are
mainly due to high levels of unprotected,
non-monogamous sex has restricted policy
interventions. Hence, prevention of HIV is
pursued predominantly through initiatives
to “change behaviour”, such as the ABC
approach (Abstain, Be faithful, and use a
Condom). Several studies stress the need
to look beyond proximal factors of highrisk
behaviour in HIV transmission. There
is need to investigate why people engage
in high-risk behaviour to successfully
address the crisis.
Moreover, the use of the term “pandemic”
conceals the fact that multiple epidemics
may differ in causation, velocity, duration,
and impact.