Daily Nation/ Wednesday, April 26, 2006
Elder: Immorality fuels spread of Aids

By NATION Correspondents
The spread of Aids in Nyanza
Province is due to mmorality,
the chairman of the Luo Council
of Elders, Mr Meshack Ogalo,
has said.
Mr Ogalo disagreed with those who
blamed polygamy for the spread of the
disease.
He said yesterday at a workshop on
women, property and inheritance rights
in Nakuru Town: “Immorality is a major
cause of HIV infections in Nyanza and
other parts of the country. Polygamy is
not the problem.”
The high rate of HIV infections had led
to an increase in the number of young
widows in the province, he added.
The workshop also heard that immoral
behaviour on the shores of Lake Victoria
was a setback in the fight against the
disease.
Many young and educated Luos were
shunning polygamy although it was still
widely practised in their community, the
participants were told.
More than one wife
Due to the hard economic times, many
people in the community were not keen
on having more than one wife.
Said Mrs Phoebe Asiyo, a former MP:
“Polygamy is dying in this community
because young people are shunning the
practice as it was just for prestige in the
olden days.”
Mrs Asiyo said high poverty and illiteracy
levels, especially along the shores of
Lake Victoria, were to blame for the
spread of the disease.
“We have started educating fishermen
on the dangers they expose themselves
to by being immoral,” she said.
A lean workforce is to blame for the
congestion and poor services in public
hospitals, the Kenya Clinical Officers
Association has said.
It said poor pay for health workers contributed
a lot to the shortage of staff in
such hospitals.
The association’s officials also threatened
to call a strike if their quest for a
pay rise and demands for hiring of more
health staff were not fulfilled by June.
“There is need for the Government to
employ more clinical officers and award
them a salary increase if it is really
committed to improving health care,”
said the association’s national chairman,
Mr Japheth Mutangili. He spoke
to the Nation in Nyahururu Town.
But he was optimistic that the ongoing
consultations between the association
and the Health ministry would bear
fruit.
Boost morale
This, he said, would boost the morale
of clinicians who had been denied a
pay rise for a long time yet they played
crucial roles in providing medical care.
Mr Mutangili was accompanied by the
association’s national secretary general,
Mr Japheth Akwabi, and the local
chapter chairman, Mr Irungu Kamau.
