Daily Nation/ Thursday, April 20, 2006

Men use catch as bait in their quest to seduce women who need credit
and this increases the prevalence of STDs on the shores of Lake Victoria

Sex-for-fish
trade thrives
despite Aids

By JOHN OYWA
The morning breeze swept
across the vast lake, whirling
the murky waters into furious
waves. Two motorised boats,
weighed down by a bountiful harvest of
fish, bobbed and rumbled as they raced
to the beach.
The arrival of the vessels stirred up
Uhanya, one of the busiest beaches on
the shores of Lake Victoria. Women,
draped in khangas and armed with
basins and baskets, scrambled for fish as
the coxswain angrily called for order.
As a crowd gathered, a fisherman
whose boat had just docked, roared at
the traders: “There is no credit today.”
Standing on a rocky patch, 30-yearold
Anastasia Onguko stared into the
distant hills, disappointment etched on
her face.
The previous day, she had tried to get
fish on credit and walked away in protest
after a fisherman demanded sex in
exchange for fish worth Sh300.
Fishy affair
A newcomer to the beach, Mrs Onguko
was yet to come to terms with the
unwritten rule of “No sex, no fish” for
the poor women fish mongers.
The sex-for-fish trade that has characterized
the fishing industry, scares her
stiff, yet she has limited options. To sustain
her small scale fish trade, she has to
identify and befriend one of the fishermen
who will give her fish on credit.
A widow and a mother of three, Mrs
Onguko had been warned that without
jaboya (fisherman boyfriend), her budding
fish trade was doomed.
She is among hundreds of impoverished
women whose lives are woven
around the intricate fishing industry.
Women here trade on tilapia, omena
and Nile Perch.
The sex-for-fish culture has increased
the HIV rate on the shores of Lake Victoria
and experts say the situation is
quickly getting out of hand.
The Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock
estimated that 75 per cent of
women who work on the beaches have
come from other regions. Most of them
are widows, divorcees and spinsters
struggling to make a living.
Abundant supplies
A large number of these women are
poor. They trade on credit, getting fish
to sell then paying for their supplies several
days later.
Government records show that more
than 60 per cent of the lake basin communities
live in abject poverty despite
the abundant fish supplies.
The school drop out rate, especially
among girls in the beach communities, is
among the highest in the country.
In Suba District, for example, seven in
every 10 girls who enrol in Standard
One, drop out before they reach Standard
Eight, according to the Institute for
Economic Affairs’ ‘Little Fact Book’.
In Busia, only about 17 per cent of
pupils who finish primary school join
secondary school. The trend is similar in
other lakeside districts.
An educationist, Ms Jenipher Kere,
who has been leading a campaign to
empower women in the fishing industry,
says poverty among women makes them
vulnerable to sexual demands from their
suppliers, especially when they fail to
pay.
Women have been marginalised in
the fishing industry yet they play a crucial
role, especially in the post harvest of
fish, she says.
Ms Kere’s Women In the Fishing
Project (WIFIP) has waged a massive
education campaign on the beaches to
help reverse the trend.
“Women trading in fish are a desperate
lot. They not only need education
but economic empowerment. They also
need health facilities,” said Ms Kere.
On the shores of Lake Victoria,
from Busia in Western Province
to Muhuru Bay in Migori District,
women are being forced into sexual
slavery as they struggle to survive
harsh economic times.
In 2002, a non-governmental organisation,
Training and Advocacy for Community
Initiative, helped to rescue 21
school dropouts, who were being
exploited by fishermen in Suba District.
With funding from the United
Nations Children’s Fund (Unicef) and
Watoto Kwanza Trust, the organisation
used chiefs to recruit the girls into a tailoring
training project.
The girls who were each presented
with sewing machines after the training,
told of horrid tales at the hands of the
fishermen. Many of them were orphans
who traded in fish to feed their siblings.
To fishing communities, sex-for-fish is
a common practice even as health
experts blame it for the high HIV/Aids
prevalence on the beaches. To these
communities, women having joboya is a
tradition.
Changing partners is common. Men,
ironically bar their women from participating
in fishing activities apparently to
protect them from the polluted environment,
yet they enjoy secret sex from
widowed and unmarried women.
Beach management officials downplay
the problem and see no sin in
women fish traders befriending those
supplying them with fish.
The Government and
some development agencies
are alarmed at the
exploitation of women
on the beaches.
A district officer for
Nyatike in Migori District,
Mr Charles Muiruri,
recently blew the whistle on the sexfor-
fish problem, saying it had increased
Aids-related infections.
Mr Muiruri said poor women working
on the beaches were forced into sex to
get fish to sell. He said the problem was
rampant on nearly all the 300 beaches of
Lake Victoria.
A one-week surveillance by the Nation
confirmed that the practice was
rampant on the beaches and unearthed
deeply-rooted moral decay, fuelled by
high illiteracy levels, ignorance and crippling
poverty.
Many girls who drop out of school
due to poverty or after losing their parents
to Aids, fall easy prey to joboya.
Many of them trade in fish to fend for
themselves and their siblings and are
forced by poverty to befriend the fishermen
who supply them with free fish.
In a culture where women are prohibited
from going into the lake to fish, men
take advantage and exploit them.
Among the lake communities of Nyanza
and Western provinces, women are only
allowed to smoke fish, dry it then sell it.
For many years, randy fishermen have
used fish to lure women and young girls
into sex.
During low season when fish is scarce,
only women with joboya survive.
In such seasons, it does not matter
whether you have money or not. The
fishermen will serve their lovers first.
In some of the beaches, men defended
the practice, saying it was a natural
friendship between a man and a woman
and had nothing to do with fish.
“We don’t call it sex-for-fish here
because nobody forces the women into
affairs. We don’t have such cases on our
beach,” said Mr Salim Juma, a member
of Nyangwina Beach Management Unit
in Muhuru Bay.
A local councillor, Samuel Orore concurs.
“We have heard about fish-for-sex,
but not on our beach. What happens
here is a natural man-woman relationship,”
he says.
But a local businesswoman, Mrs Janet
Paul, laughs off the denials. “Fish-forsex
issue is an open secret here. Both
young and old women offer their bodies
in exchange for fish,” she whispered to
us.
At Nambo Beach in Bondo District, a
women’s group leader, Mrs Mary Ouko,
speaks boldly about what she terms the
biggest sexual slavery of our times.
She says the practice has been rampant.
“It has been a serious issue and
women knew they couldn’t get fish if
they didn’t befriend the fishermen.
Mrs Ouko says the Banda Nyatiti
Women’s group, which she chairs, has
been spearheading a campaign to end
this practice. They educate the fishermen
and the fish mongers and distribute
condoms.
Mrs Ouko’s group has received funding
from WIFIP and ActionAid to conduct
HIV/Aids awareness campaigns
and to start micro-finance credit
facilities.
At Uhanya beach, fishermen
deny they are sexually exploiting
women traders. The beach
chairman, Mr James Oracho
Wire, says most of the affairs
w e r e s e c r e t p r i v a t e
arrangements.
The women, he says, have not
complained to his office. “These
are adults and we cannot tell them how
to go about their private lives”, said Mr
Oracho.
A beach management unit clerk, Mrs
Dorine Atieno, calls fish-for-sex was a
reality. “Some women do it because they
can’t afford to buy fish. Others are just
immoral,” she says.
She blames womenfolk for the situation
as many of them have refused to
take up positions in the Beach Management
Units so that they can use their
positions to campaign for changes.
“I am the only woman in the committee,”
says Ms Atieno, a fisherman’s wife.
Alarmed by the high number of people
living with HIV/AIDS around
Uhanya beach, a group of women have
formed a group to care for the sick children
orphaned by the disease.
Meanwhile the fishy trade continues
unabated.