Daily Nation/ Wednesday, June 28, 2006

KENYA COUNTRY COORDINATING MECHANISM (CCM)
The Global Fund to Fight Aids, Tuberculosis and Malaria –
call for Proposals (Round 6)
The Global Fund has issued 6th call for proposals from partners in countries hardest hit by AIDS,
Tuberculosis and Malaria. The closing date for proposal submission is 3rd August, 2006.
All partners (NGOs, Faith Based Organizations, CBOs Research and Academic Institutions, Private
Sector) in Kenya are required to submit their proposals to the Kenya CCM addressed to the
Chairman, CCM- Afya House, Cathedral Road, P.O. Box 30016 Nairobi. All proposals must be
delivered to Room 724, Afya House by 10th July, 2006 not later than 5.00 p.m, so as to give
adequate time to review and further action by CCM technical committees. The proposals to be
submitted must be within the following priority objectives.
1 Priority Areas for TB
• Strengthen health systems capacity and management for the effective and efficient delivery
of quality TB/HIV collaborative activities.
• Strengthen involvement of all health providers including community, civil society
organizations and private sector participation in TB/HIV control activities.
2 Priority Areas for Malaria
• Strengthen vector control strategic interventions of the National Malaria Strategy using
evidence based Integrated Vector Management (IVM) approaches in the high malaria
burden districts.
• Strengthen community participation in IVM activities and improve access to information on
IVM for behavior change communication at community level.
3. Priority Areas for HIV/AIDS
• Reduce HIV prevalence through community mobilization aimed at increasing uptake of
services/interventions for prevention of mother to child transmission of HIV.
• Provide treatment for adults and children living with HIV/AIDS.
• Provide linkage of treatment centres with communities with a view to improve drug
adherence and positive prevention targeting discordant couples, stigma and nutrition.
All applications must provide sufficient information on the capacity of the organization to implement
the proposed activities. This must include evidence of registration, projects implemented, bank
details, registered office, name of districts and constituency where the activities will be
implemented.
Viable proposals will be harmonized into one country proposal to be forwarded to the Global Fund
by the CCM.
The new guidelines and the revised proposal forms are available on the Global Fund’s website at
www.theglobalfund.org. The detailed priority objectives for the country are available at
www.nacc.or.ke. Interested partners with no access to the internet may visit any nearby internet
bureau and have the guidelines and forms downloaded and printed. All proposals must be
submitted in the Global Fund prescribed format.
Kenya CCM brings together representatives from the Government, the Donor Community, United
Nations Agencies, Civil Society, People Living with AIDS, Non-Governmental Organizations and the
Private Sector to advise the Government and all implementing agencies on all matters related to the
Global Fund, Health Sector Policy and Strategy and Coordination. It operates through technical
inter-agency coordinating committees.
DR. HEZRON O. NYANGITO
CHAIRMAN, KENYA CCM