DAILY NATION
Tuesday June 16, 2009

By KITSEPILE NYATHI
and Reuters
Germany pledged 25 million euros
($35 million) in aid to Zimbabwe
today and Chancellor Angela
Merkel said Berlin could provide
more support if the poverty-stricken
country undertakes more democratic reforms.
Zimbabwe’s Prime Minister Morgan Tsvangirai
has been touring Europe and the
US to try to convince donor countries that
his fragile unity government can rescue
the southern African country from economic
and political chaos.
Germany’s Development minister
Heidemarie Wieczorek-Zeul said Berlin
would contribute 20 million euros to a
World Bank fund focused on promoting
democracy in Zimbabwe, and another 5
million euros for manure and seed.
Democratic reforms
Germany now mainly provides humanitarian
aid to Zimbabwe.
Chancellor Merkel said she was ready
to provide more comprehensive help if
the unity government set about creating
a constitution, undertaking land reform
and establishing new state authorities.
Germany could help with these democratic
reforms, she added.
“My expectation is that every success
in the building of democratic structures
could potentially lead to more help. But
this need not be fi nancial help. It could
also be advice,” Chancellor Merkel told
reporters after meeting Mr Tsvangirai
Zimbabwe PM wins
more support as he
continues visit to
Western capitals
Germany to give Harare $35m
in Berlin.
Western aid is only beginning to trickle
into Zimbabwe -- and all of it is bypassing
the unity government of Mr Tsvangirai
and President Robert Mugabe.
US President Barack Obama on Friday
promised $73 million in new aid that a
White House offi cial said would go towards
fi ghting HIV and Aids and promoting
good governance in the southern
African nation.
Signifi cantly, the money will not go to
the government but will be channelled
through aid agencies.
Chancellor Merkel said she could envisage
Germany providing similar aid, targeted
at equipping schools and hospitals.
Mr Tsvangirai said Zimbabwe needs
credit to revive its economy.
“We have already made a number of
strides forward. I ask that that be noted,”
he said, pointing to the re-opening of
schools and hospitals and some success
in reining in infl ation.
“We need bridge loans now to rebuild
our economy,” he added.
Political aims
Zimbabwe’s unity government was formed
by President Mugabe and Mr Tsvangirai
in February but their power-sharing deal
has not been fully implemented.
Mr Tsvangirai’s Movement for Democratic
Change (MDC) has long accused
President Mugabe’s Zanu-PF of using violence
to further its political aims, charges
it denies. Arrests of MDC activists have
strained the new government.
Western donors have said aid will only
fl ow when a democracy is created and
economic reforms are implemented.
Meanwhile, a six-member IMF team is
in Zimbabwe to assess progress in the reform
of economic policies by the coalition
government and the country’s humanitarian
crisis.
The mission, which becomes the third
since the formation of a coalition government
in February, follows the IMFs decision
last month to resume technical assistance
to Zimbabwe, which was stopped
a decade ago.
The head of the delegation jetted into
the country today while the rest of the
team began its meetings with Ministry of
Finance offi cials last week on external domestic
debts, revenue and expenditure.
During their stay, a series of high profi
le meetings with government, banking,
industry and agricultural offi cials have
been lined up.
The delegation is composed of Mr Vitaliy
Kramarenko (head of mission), Mr
Wouter Bossu, Mr Lars Engstrom, Mr
Gilda Fernandez, Mr Richard Hughes
and Mr Denevieve Verdier.
Will be scrutinised
On completion of their work on June 29,
the mission is expected to hold a report
back meeting with Finance minister Mr
Tendai Biti, the Economic Planning and
Investment Promotion minister, Mr Elton
Mangoma, and the Central Bank governor,
Dr Gideon Gono.
According to the missions work schedule,
all sectors of the economy, including
health, education, infrastructure and current
food situation will be scrutinised.
Dr Gonos continued stay at the RBZ,
which has divided the coalition because
of his loyalty to President Mugabe, will
also come under spotlight.
The IMF has in the past pointed out key
governance weaknesses, including lack of
enforcement of the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe
Acts accountability requirements
and non-compliance with the International
Financial Reporting Standards.