Daily Nation/ Wednesday, February 1, 2006
Through powerful stories, Kenyan students tell the world of painful
experiences with a raging epidemic and give their communities hope

Of art, masks and war on Aids

The students walk up the stage,
wearing masks. One-by-one
they tell their heart-rending
tales on Aids.
The colourful masks veil their faces
and give them the courage to speak up
about the epidemic and its devastating
effects on their communities. The masks
also seem to give their presentations the
punch, resulting in a powerful collective
picture, one of people who have seen
the worst of the epidemic — and their
resolve to roll it back.
From behind their veils, the students
narrate painful experiences with a disease:
How it has forced them to face
harsh realities at tender ages and left
some of them destitute by taking away
parents after depleting their resources.
But in their sad stories lies hope,
thanks to a partnership between Okok
Secondary School in Kisumu District of
Nyanza Province and Kiboko Projects,
an American non-governmental organisation
working with children from
diverse cultures in campaigning against
the disease worldwide. The project is
using schools to reach out to the wider
community with messages on HIV and
Aids, providing an avenue for students
and other residents to express themselves
and relate their experiences as
one way of coming to terms and coping
with the epidemic.
Students address HIV/Aids issues
through mask-making, storytelling,
photo diaries, painting, theatre and
video interviews. Through the various
media, they capture the challenges of
families ravaged by the epidemic and
the tribulations children face after the
death of their parents and relatives.
Correct misperception
One aim of the project is to spread
the message far and wide. That is
why Okok has been linked to Eleanor
Roosevelt High School in New York
City in an exchange programme that
encourages sharing of experiences. It is
hoped the exchanges will correct misperception
by students from both countries
and create a common understanding
on how to fight the epidemic.
For Jenipher Anyango, a 14-year-old
Form One student, the project has
opened her eyes and strengthened her
resolve to do something to contain the
spread of HIV, the virus that causes
Aids.
Anyango, who is among the girls
involved in making masks and recording
video interviews, says working with
these media has given her courage to
speak openly about HIV and Aids,
which she could not do in the past due
to the stigma attached to the disease.
“This way of communicating gives
you the courage to speak. With a mask
covering your face, you get to speak
openly and the veil of fear is also lifted,”
she says.
Anyango says she can now face the
world and her peers to talk openly
about the epidemic.
“I didn’t know the youth have a role
to play in the society
by speaking openly
and boldly on issues
that affect not only us,
but also our elders.
Through the exposure
we have to work by
students in other parts
of the world through
this project, a sense of duty has been
instilled in us and we are prepared for
the challenges.”
Anyango says young people should be
helped to take up their roles in the society
by being exposed to activities that
prepare them for such roles. Says the
teenager: “It is our duty as much as it is
for the older people to address issues
related to Aids as they equally affect
and infect us, but without such exposure,
which builds self-confidence in us, we
cannot effectively play our part.”
Paul Bugi, 17, agrees. The Form
Three student says his personal experience
with the artistic projects, especially
m a s k -
making, has
given him a
better view
of how to
deal with
i s s u e s
related to
t h e
epidemic.
“It was not easy before, but my experience
with the masks and paintings has
invigorated and encouraged me to
address these issues,” he says.
The school’s principal, Mr Kariako
Malachi, says the Kiboko activities have
not only instilled confidence in his students,
but have also unlocked their
potential.
“Through the projects, we have seen
potential journalists conducting interviews
and also artists-in-the-making
communicate through powerful paintings
and drawings,” he said.
Kiboko Projects was started seven
years ago by New York artists Mark
Scheflen and Jill Raufman. It has since
grown into a flourishing cultural organisation
that has organised workshops,
exhibitions, and cultural exchange programmes
on three continents.
Neglected children
It aims to provide “opportunities for
artistic and creative expression to individuals,
some of whom have had limited
access to this experience”.
The organisation reaches out to communities
through art and education,
encouraging people of all ages and
diverse background to tell their “unfiltered”
stories to the world. For instance,
in Kiboko Projects you will find people
ranging from those living with
HIV/Aids, the physically and mentally
handicapped, children from neglectful
families, immigrants and ex-convicts, to
students and professional artists.
Exhibitions are an important vehicle
for linking people from various communities
taking part in the project. Last
year, works by Kenyan communities featured
in one such show in St Petersburg,
bringing the reality of Aids in Africa to
the people of the second largest city in
Russia, where Aids is becoming a matter
of concern.
The show, hosted by the Artists
Union of Russia, featured five diverse
projects created through workshops with
artists, students and families in Kenya,
America and St Petersburg itself. On
display were hand-painted masks and
insightful photo diaries.
Neglected children
Also on show were videos telling
compelling stories: A family of children
aged 13-18 years orphaned by Aids;
a young woman who turned to prostitution
to pay her school fees; a 29-year-old
father of four struggling to make sure his
children are cared for after he dies of
Aids-related illnesses.
Ms Raufman, Kiboko Projects executive
director, says she has learnt to
appreciate the power of arts. “The
young and old have been able to pass
information though arts, helping not
only in the war against Aids but also
overcoming other challenges.”
Ms Raufman believes fighting stigma
is important strategy in the war on Aids:
“People need to know about it, that’s
when the stigma starts to fall off.”
Mr Scheflen, a photographer/teacher
and former construction worker, is not
new to Kenya. He first visited the country
in 1985 and was moved by the people’s
warmth. He was to return a year
later to Kituvi village in Eastern Province
to put up a three-room house for his
hosts.
He recalls how villagers “become construction
workers or artisans” and joined
him to build what he calls his “second
home”.
When he retured to America, he compiled
photos, videos and an intimate
journal of his observations into a fascinating
show of his days in Kenya. He has
since displayed the showcase in galleries,
universities and public exhibition spaces
in New York City.
Besides his own works, Mr Scheflen is
displaying drawings and paintings by
Children of Makueni and Machakos.