DAILY NATION
Friday December 15, 2006

Swazi nurses flee Aids duties

UN estimates the national
infection rate of people aged
15 at 49 at 33.4 per cent

MBABANE, Thursday
Will the last nurse on duty
please turn off the
lights?’ reads a handwritten
note at a clinic
in Manzini, Swaziland’s
Aids-hit commercial
centre, 35km southeast of the capital,
Mbabane.
The wry note disguises the pain of
the country’s diminishing number of
nurses and hints at the reason why
their colleagues have fled the country to
offer their services elsewhere.
“The working conditions, the lack of
basic necessities to treat people and all
the dying: it’s demoralising,” said a
nurse, 28, who asked that her name not
be used. “It’s not just the money - it is
hard to watch people die and you are
helpless to do anything about it because
there are no drugs or other things [to
treat them].”
Working in a poorly lit ward with
scant equipment and a chronic shortage
of drugs, are as much a motivation
to leave the country as any promise of
greater financial reward in Europe, the
US or neighbouring South Africa.
In the emergency room of Manzini’s
Raleigh Fitkin Memorial Hospital, a
child screams as a nurse removes
sutures from a stitched finger wound. “I
haven’t got the proper cutter – they
have such scissors in the paediatric
ward,” said the nurse as she gouged the
tender skin around the wound with
large scissors not intended for this
procedure.
In a recent report, ‘Public sector
nurses in Swaziland: can the downturn
be reversed?’ released by Human
Resources for Health, an on-line medical
journal published in collaboration
with the World Health Organisation,
authors Katharina Kober and Wim Van
Damme noted: “The public health sector
in Swaziland faces a serious shortage
of health workers: 44 per cent of
posts for physicians, 19 per cent of
posts for nurses and 17 per cent of nursing
assistant posts are unfilled. We
identified emigration and attrition due
to HIV/Aids as major factors depleting
the health workforce.”
UNAids estimates the national HIV
infection rate of people aged 15 to 49 at
33.4 per cent, the highest in the world.
Two-thirds of Swaziland’s roughly one
million people, ruled by sub-Saharan
Africa’s last executive monarch, live on
$2 or less per day.
The report concluded: “Our projections
show that both emigration and
attrition due to HIV/Aids pose a serious
double threat for Swaziland’s
health system, which, if not effectively
tackled, would mean the loss of 44 per
cent of the nursing workforce in the
public sector up to 2010.”
Nurses at St Theresa’s, a clinic on
the outskirts of Manzini run by the
Roman Catholic Church with financial
support from government, last week
held a crisis meeting after two months
of erratic salary payments or none at
all.
“It is too hard doing what we do,
under these conditions that you see,” a
nurse at the clinic told IRIN/PlusNews.
As a result of the government’s policy
of zero growth, no new posts were
created in over 20 years, even with the
onset of the HIV/Aids pandemic,
which began to bite in the mid-1990s.
The WHO has put the total number of
health workers posts at 3,726.
“Some 758 of the 944 established
nursing posts in the public and mission
sectors are filled. The nurse-topopulation
ratio in the public and mission
sectors is, therefore, around 70
per 100,000. The official number of
nursing posts was widely regarded as
inadequate for the actual workload in
the health sector,” the Kober and Van
Damme report commented.
The researchers said that 288 of the
758 nurses, about 38 per cent,
employed in the public and mission
sectors were probably HIV positive, of
whom 29, or 10 per cent, might have
died during 2005. They projected that
three to four per cent of the entire
nursing workforce would succumb to
Aids-linked illnesses each year.
HIV/Aids is a lesser contributor to
the country’s nursing shortage than
emigration. Researchers found that 100
of the national nursing workforce of
about 800 leave the country annually.
Swaziland’s two nursing colleges produce
about 80 to 90 graduates a year,
while a school for nursing assistants
delivers around 20 graduates.
Although the two training sites
receive hundreds of applicants annually,
too few student bursaries from the
health and social welfare ministry, a
lack of teaching staff and student
accommodation, and insufficient opportunities
for practical training have kept
enrolment low.
A basic nursing course last three
years, but most students do either one
additional year to obtain a qualification
in midwifery or a five-year Bachelor in
Nursing Sciences degree course.
“I left nursing school and went right
to work, like all my classmates. I worked
at the Mbabane Government Hospital
[the country’s largest health facility],
and right away I saw someone die
because they couldn’t get the medicines
they needed. This is why Swaziland
loses more nurses to ‘greener pastures’,
in my opinion. And Aids is making our
work so much harder,” the nurse said.
The Kober and van Damme report
said 80 per cent of bed occupancy in the
medical and paediatric wards of government
hospitals nationwide was
HIV/Aids-related.
“Doctors from a mission hospital
estimated that five years ago they
would spend an average of five minutes
per patient on a ward round, while
today this was more likely to be 20 to
30 minutes. There is an increased
demand for health services, and health
workers speak of feeling overwhelmed
and burned out,” the authors said.
On a previous visit, Kober and Van
Damme found that public and mission
health facilities had 1,481 posts, but
only 1,184 staff were reported as actually
working at the facilities, leaving
297, or 20 per cent, of the posts vacant.
To increase the number of nurses,
the Ministry of Health has requested
the Ministry of Public Service to lift a
ban on the recruitment of foreign nurses,
whose salaries would be paid by the
Global Fund to Fight Aids, Tuberculosis
and Malaria.
Another solution to the shortage of
nurses might come from government’s
rollout of antiretroviral drugs for people
living with HIV.
“No one wants to talk about it, but
Swaziland’s Aids problem is frightening
nurses. We are on the frontline of this
battle, and it is easy for some to run
away from the danger,” the nurse said.
“It takes real patriotism and a dedication
to your calling as a nurse to work
as a nurse in Swaziland today.”
(afrol News)
