Saturday Nation/ July 8, 2006

South Africa’s drug stores
hit by change to price rules

By JAMES MACHARIA
Small South African pharmacies say
they are being squeezed out of business
by new medicine pricing rules
drafted by the government to make
drugs more affordable in Africa’s biggest
economy.
The health department says capped prices
will save consumers up to Sh31 billion ($427.1
million) a year, but pharmacists say the government
is driving small rural pharmacies out
of business, hurting the people it was
intended to help.
Over-the-counter
Medicine prices are a particularly sensitive
subject in South Africa, which has the world’s
second biggest caseload of HIV and Aids
with about five million people infected, and
where many are not covered by medical
insurance to help pay for medicines.
“With me shutting down, it’s the poorest in
this rural area that will suffer most,” says
local pharmacist Robbie van Kerkhof
Steep losses meant he had to shut down his
40-year-old business in Steinsburg, a town of
about 16,000 people in the Eastern Cape
province where it was the only pharmacy, he
said.
To obtain over-the-counter drugs, local
people would either have to pay consultation
fees to see a doctor who can then dispense
the drugs, or travel to nearby towns to get
their medicine, he said. Pharmacists say many
medical insurance companies were backing
the price caps because it meant the insurers
would pay out much less in prescription drug
claims.
Clive Stanton, head of the Pharmaceutical
Society of South Africa, says 103 small pharmacies
around the country had shut by the
last official count conducted by his group in
November last year, most blaming the price
caps.
“Since then a lot more have gone,” he said.
Small pharmacists say besides the price caps,
the government also opened up the medicines
sector for entry by big companies, a
double blow to the smaller stores.
The government had hoped this would
spread new outlets in rural areas, but most
have launched in cities.
“This is a double blow, it is not just the
(capped) prices that have driven me out of
business,” said Loius Botha,
who shut his pharmacy at a
Port Elizabeth mall in February.
Ntobeko Mpanza of the
health department’s drug
pricing unit said the government
could not deny
licences to those qualified,
or prevent companies from launching new
outlets in big malls.
Another to fall in the wake of the entry of
the bigger rivals was Louis Deenik, who says
his family-run pharmacy based at the smart
Sandton City mall in Johannesburg shut its
doors for the last time at the end of May.
As a result, 15 workers lost their jobs. “It’s
been one long struggle downwards,” he said,
adding that small pharmacies were having to
merge to survive, while some had been
swallowed up by larger rivals.
Peter Giltrow, owner of another pharmacy
in Port Elizabeth, said that for the
average person medicine prices were too
high, but there could have been a better
way to curb them to minimise the fallout
on pharmacies. The Pharmaceutical Society’s
Stanton conceded that, in spite of the
closures, the new rules had substantially
cut drug prices for consumers.
“Patients are getting a cheaper service,
but the problem is that in some areas they
will get no service at all,” he said. What the
new measures boiled down to was a transition
of pharmacy ownership from small to
bigger players, he said. One such big
player is drugs and cosmetics retailer New
Clicks. Its pharmacy unit has also struggled
under the new price curbs
but the group has weathered
the storm because of
its diversified business.
Clicks pharmacy unit suffered
a 38-million-rand loss
in the year to August 2005.
Clicks and other pharmacies
launched a storm of
protest, and won a court battle against the
initial version of the price caps. The government
was ordered back to the drawing
board, and has since drafted a new set now
being debated in the sector.
The new caps propose a sliding scale
that keeps fees low for the cheapest drugs,
limiting pharmacists to charging 7 rand
plus 28 percent of the purchase price for
drugs priced below 75 rand. (Reuters)