DAILY NATION
Friday December 1, 2006

MINISTRY OF HEALTH
December 1st each year marks a global event dedicated to remembering the infected and
affected by Aids, learning more about the devastating effects of the disease around the
world, and reaffirming the commitment to fight it.
This year’s theme “STOP AIDS, KEEP THE PROMISE” reflects on the effects of
HIV/AIDS. The devastation brought by HIV/AIDS is so acute that it has become one of
the main obstacles to development itself. We therefore must join hands to stop it.
Ladies and gentlemen, two-thirds of new infections are occuring in the region, translating
in 3.2 million infections each year. The increasing trend of HIV/aids infection at alarming
levels dictate that special measures and ‘emergency actions be taken to stop further
spread of the scourge on the continent. however, we cannot forget to highlight the falling
prevalence in our country.
As you are aware, the response to the HIV/AIDS epidemic proposed in the national aids
strategic plan comprises three broadly defined intervention areas:
• Prevention of new infections;
• Care and support for those infected or affected by HIV/AIDS
• Mitigation of the impact of the epidemic on economic and social development efforts.
With the above in mind, we hope this commemoration will among others bring increased
commitment for increased HIV Prevention in Kenya and African region as a whole. During 2005, the Ministers of Health held in line
with the declaration and road map towards a summit in Gaberone in 2001, there followed a resolution calling for Member States to
intensify HIV Prevention efforts. The resolution also called for the declaration of year 2006 as the year for acceleration of HIV
prevalence in Kenya our prevention program have achieved
acceleration of HIV prevention is an important intervention and it takes place within the ambit of the universal access that provides
a new momentum to scale up and integrate prevention, and support with the goal of reaching universal access by 2010.
Ladies and gentlemen, the national HIV/aids strategic plan is to enable the government to play its leadership role in aids prevention
and control activities. of late, there has been a high level of political goodwill by the government to scale up HIV/aids prevention
and care.
IN THE MEANTIME, WE SHOULD CONTINUE TO INTENSIFY OUR OWN CAMPAIGN AGAINST AIDS, INCLUDING:
• A sustained public awareness campaign encouraging safe sex and the use of condoms;
• A better focused programme targeted at the reduction and elimination of poverty and the improvement of the
nutritional standards of our people;
• A concerted fight against opportunistic diseases, including the and all sexually transmitted diseases; with HIV
and AIDS as well as the orphans in our society;
• Contributing to the international effort to develop an aids vaccine; and,
• Further research on Anti-retroviral drugs.
Ladies and Gentlemen, it is through continued collaborations, that we wil l be able to harmonize our efforts in the administration of
a comprehensive response towards the HIV/AIDS spread.
Thank you all.
Today, with people around the world, not just here in our country, we turn our
thoughts to the more than 40 million men, women, and children who are living
with HIV/AIDS that’s what world AIDS day is all about and on World AIDS Day,
we renew our commitment to turn the tide against this disease.
It is alarming that each year, more than 2 million people lose their lives to
HIV/AIDS in Subsaharan Africa and that in 2004 alone, more than 3 million
infections occurred in the African region.
It is our concern that programming and implementation of the existing
evidence-based and cost effective interventions for HIV prevention have not
been on a sufficient scale and that new infections are still occurring at unacceptability
high levels. This has made us to scale-up the prevention measures
and behavioural change communication to young people aged between 15-24
years. With the HIV prevalence rate going down to about 6% in Kenya, we
need not to celebrate yet for we have to renew our commitment and accelerate
prevention of the pandemic before we lose all our gains. Stakeholders in
Kenya and Africa as a region need to accelerate the scale-up of prevention
programmes which target the youth, women, girls and other vulnerable groups
including the sex workers. Young people are exposed to HIV in different ways
in Subsaharan Africa, the main mode of transmission is heterosexual intercourse.
This region contains almost two-thirds of all young people living with
HIV - approximately 6.2 million people, 75% of whom are youngsters.
Challenges posed by AIDS call for a multisectoral approach, thus bringing together a diversity of actors such as the
private organisations and non-governmental organisations each contributing and complementing in its specialised
area of HIV/AIDS management. The Ministry of Health through National Aids and STD control programme (NASCOP)
in collaboration with our development partners have made a tremendous progress towards the scaling-up of prevention
programs such as mother-to-child transmission of HIV/AIDS, VCT and other prevention measures in Kenya.
Scale-up has also been done through communication materials (IEC) and advocacy initiatives - between health
providers and communities, between community leaders and communities, between communities and positive people,
among family members, neighbours, and among young people.
The progress made in implementing the 3 by 5 initiative is encouraging and we are concerned that scaling-up
treatment and care offer a good /opportunity for accelerating HIV prevention efforts. I urge Kenyans to continue going
for voluntary HIV Counselling and testing regardless of their marital status. This will help them make decisions to stay
negative if they are not yet infected. On behalf of the Ministry of Health, l would like to extend my thanks and
encouragement to our development partners and all stakeholders who tirelessly are engaged in the fight against
HIV/AIDS.
NASCOP PROGRAMMES
1. VCT Programme
2. PMTCT/STI Programme
3. HOME BASED CARE (HBC) PROGRAMME
4. ART PROGRAMME
NASCOP achievements
There has been significant increase in number of Kenyans tested for HIV and close receiving ARVs, improved surveillance and quality laboratory services, development of training materials for
PMTCT, VCT, TB and diagnostic testing and counseling. Guidelines for HIV testing in a clinical setting have been developed and AIDS in Kenya a publication highlighting HIV/AIDS trends,
interventions and impacts has been launched. Better practices in PMTCT launched.
Way forward on NASCOP activities
There should be standardization of materials and data capture tools, community mobilization for increased service uptake should be intensified. There should also be increased co-ordination between
partners and development agencies. Improvement should be done in several areas such as physical infrastructure at health facilities, health management information systems and logistics
management. Finally, there should be a reduction in the cost of drugs and laboratory tests.