Sunday Nation/June 18, 2006
Project brings hope to slum dwellers

Kibaba Kidogo is changing the long-held view of faith-based organisations as centres of charity

It began as an effort to help people living with
HIV and Aids, but has slowly becoming a
model to residents of Nairobi's slums on the
benefits of pooling funds to start small businesses.
When Zinduka Afrika, linked to the
International Christian Centre in Nairobi,
launched the Kibaba Kidogo project as an offshoot
of its regular HIV/Aids programme, Zinduka's
director Trizzer Mungai was leaning more on her
faith than hard-boiled economic theories.
At the core of the micro-enterprise project,
which seeks to give HIV-infected people — especially
youth and women — a better quality of life,
is changing the view of faith-based non-governmental
organisations (NGOs) as channels for
handouts.
As a church-based NGO, Zinduka found it even
more difficult to explain why it would not give out
handouts — you know…John 3:16 and all. But
Mrs Mungai was determined to go a different
route, somewhere between a traditional NGO and
a church group.
And so Kibaba Kidogo was born — culled from
the Kiswahili saying, kidogo kidogo hujaza kibaba.
The concept is quite simple. Get six or seven
slum residents together to pool the little money
they have: it could be as low as Sh40 since they
have no regular income.
To avoid stigmatizing those infected with the
HIV virus, the project has been opened up to anyone
one willing to join. ‘‘If you give a poor person
Sh500 to start a business, and yet they cannot even
eat, that money is wasted. For them their basic
needs, and not business, are a priority. We work to
keep the little they have in the community,’’ said
Mrs Mungai. Kibaba Kidogo is unique in the
sense that no donor or church funds were used to
start it, but it relies entirely on the meagre
resources of the members, currently divided into
20 groups. It wasn’t easy starting off. ‘‘We told
them we were bringing knowledge, not money.
They would listen, shake their heads and go
away. Their friendship and relationship with
the church and themselves is all the security
required. ‘‘We then move from social networks
to social capital,’’ says Mrs Mungai.
Where people have defaulted, the networks
kicked and forced them to pay up — plus the
fact that their money was in the group.
In the slightly over one year that the project
has been on, its fund value has grown to over
Sh500,000. Because only two officers are needed,
Zinduka Afrika has been able to keep costs
for the project low. The officers offer guidance
and skills training. Members borrowing share
their business ideas to avoid duplication.
‘‘As months go by, we withdraw slowly to let
them own the groups. After four months we
leave the management to them, and only intervene
on their request. We want that after liquidation,
they are able to survive without us,’’
said Mrs Mungai.
To start off, six members of a group may
save just Sh100 each every month. Because the
seed money is low, it is first loaned to one
member at 10 per cent interest.
Meanwhile, contributions continue and by
the fourth or fifth month, there is enough
money on the table to lend to all group members.
Within three months if there is no one borrowing,
then an agreed portion of the funds are
liquidated, and the process begins again.
‘‘Nobody misses the meetings. You should
see the excitement on their faces. This really
empowers them,’’ said Mrs Mungai.
Mrs Lucy Syombua who lives in Nairobi's
Mukuru Nyayo slums, is one of the beneficiaries.
"After I was introduced to the Zinduka
Afrika savings and loan programme, I
mobilised 11 women to form a savings and
loan group. We were trained by Zinduka
Afrika, and my initial loan was Sh500 which I
used to start up a small business of selling milk
near my house."
To start with, she bought five litres of milk
daily and sold it to her neighbours. Within three
months, her business had expanded and now
sells up to 15 litres of milk daily.
"The programme has transformed my life.
I'm no longer the housewife waiting for her
husband to provide everything. I own my business
and buy food and other things for my family,"
said Mrs Syombua.
Over 500 people have received training in
entrepreneurship and savings and loan in the
last four months. One group earned over
Sh40,000 by selling items they had made.
Before Zinduka Africa implemented Kibaba
Kidogo, Mrs Mungai had tried out something
similar with eight of her friends.
‘‘I remember it was very hard, because if you
are used to the ‘merry go round’ thing, you feel
you need so much money for you to do something
substantial. I guess it was made harder by
the fact that we had a regular income.
Eventually we agreed on Sh2000.’’
They have liquidated the group twice now
and have Sh300,000 in funds. They have their
own rules"
"Last December when we liquidated yet
again, each of us got Sh30,000. It is a great idea
for the low and middle income groups. You
realise that you don’t need to go and beg
banks," said Mrs Mungai.
Zinduka Afrika (ZAF) is registered in Kenya
as an international non-governmental organisation.
Its vision is to reflect the compassionate
nature of God to the poor and needy through
social and developmental services.