Daily Nation/ Friday, March 31, 2006

Position Summary
Working with senior staff in the Nairobi Regional Office and with Global Communications in New York, the
programme officer will coordinate the organization’s communications efforts in the East Africa region
Key Responsibilities:
Public Affairs and Media Relations
• Coordinate IAVI’s communications and media relations, and guide and support organization of public
affairs functions in East Africa in accordance with the organization’s overall goals and messages.
• Design and implement communications/media strategy including press conferences, briefings and other
media events as appropriate.
• Establish and maintain relationships with foreign correspondents and local reporters and editors in Kenya,
Rwanda and Uganda.
• Develop key messages around IAVI’s programmes and activities in the region. Draft articles, letters to
the editor and additional communications materials for East African audiences as appropriate.
• Provide support for media inquiries.
• Monitor relevant media coverage on HIV/AIDS and AIDS vaccines in Africa and share information internally.
• Develop a crisis communications process
Community Communications/Outreach
• Assist IAVI East Africa office and partners with writing and editing functions, including programme evaluation
reports, adaptation of vaccine literacy materials, newsletters and other organizational and educational
materials.
• Work to develop and maintain supportive relationships with existing partners. Develop communications
capacity of local partners and encourage the development of new community partnerships.
General Requirements
1. Excellent writing skills. Fluency in English, written and oral, required. Kiswahili and French language skills
a plus.
2. Minimum of 7 years work experience, including 4 years of experience in communications, communications
materials development and/or public relations.
3. Successful track-record working with the media in East Africa, journalism experience a plus.
4. Experience in the area of public health and communications planning. HIV and/or community development
work a plus.
5. Experience in working with an international organization a plus.
6. Knowledge of HIV/AIDS a plus.
7. Commitment to IAVI’s mission.
8. Ability to understand complex, bio-medical subjects and communicate them to diverse audiences.
Educational Requirements
Minimum Bachelors degree. Graduate study advantageous.
The International AIDS Vaccine Initiative is an Equal Opportunity Employer. IAVI encourages applications from
local nationals. Send resume, cover letter, two writing samples (published articles, thesis introduction,
research proposal or summary) and quoting post applied for on the envelope to:
The Regional Representative, IAVI,
P. O Box 340 – 00202, KNH, Nairobi.
Closing date is 30th April 2006.