24 Daily Nation/Thursday, January 19, 2006

New Aids vaccine trials
are launched in Nairobi

sub-types, A, B, and C. Almost 65 per cent of all
HIV infections in Kenya and Sub-Saharan Africa
are subtype A ; C is predominant in Southern
Africa and India, with B circulating mostly in
America, Japan, Australia, the Caribbean and
Europe.
To make it potent, the vaccine is designed to
attack the virus from two levels. On one level, it is
expected to elicit neutralising antibodies that will
disable the two key proteins — gp120 and gp41 —
that enable the virus to infect a cell.
For those viruses that will not be destroyed by
the antibodies and end up infecting the cell, then
the second level, the Cellular Immune Response,
will come into play.
In this case, when the infected cell takes a certain
form, the immune cells, especially the killer
T-cells, will be alerted and respond by killing it
before the virus replicates and infects more cells.
While most of the vaccines which have been
tested so far are designed to induce a cellular
immune response, it has remained a very tricky
area for scientists.
A vaccine that elicits antibodies, although seen
as the best way out, has also posed challenges to
the scientific community.
Recent studies have shown, however, that a
vaccine that is capable of neutralising antibodies as
well as cellular immune response is the best way
out. And that is why the NIH settled on the current
vaccine.
The institution first tested the vaccine among
Americans in 2004 before moving the testing to
other countries.
Most international scientific research institutions
are taking this route to avoid being accused
of using people in developing world as guinea pigs
in their studies.
They are then safe if they test vaccines in their
home countries before doing so among populations
in developing countries.
Trials on the same vaccine began last December
in Rwanda, with another 15 expected to carry similar
trials on the same vaccine candidate.
In Kenya, Walter Reed, the American Army
Research arm which works in collaboration with
Kenya Medical Research Institute (Kemri), is one
such other site that is planning to start trials on this
particular vaccine in Kericho.
Already, it is understood that preparations are at
an advanced stage, with the researchers having
screened hundreds of people in Kericho to establish
HIV prevalence and incidence in the
area.
If the phase one trials are successful,
Kavi will move to phase 2A that is
likely to look at the vaccine’s dosage
levels. Volunteers to be involved in this
phase will also be those at low-risk of
contracting HIV.
But when the trials move to phase
2B, where the vaccine’s efficacy is to be
proved, those to participate as volunteers
will be people at high risk of contracting
the virus.
Already, Kangemi slums have been
chosen as the ideal setting for the final
trial. For the past two years, Kavi has
been carrying out studies on HIV prevalence
and incidence among slum and
residents of the neighbouring estates.
In the event the vaccine is proven
effective after the Kangemi trials, the
effort will have wiped out the disappointment
that met the failure of the
earlier Nairobi and Oxford universities
vaccine trials.
Trials on that earlier vaccine were
discontinued last year when the results
indicated that, of the 86 volunteers vaccinated
since 2001 in Kenya and Uganda,
the immune response rate was not
greater than 25 per cent.
In Britain, where 119 volunteers
were vaccinated, only 18 per cent
immune responses were registered.
This was far below the 60 per cent
mark that IAVI and its scientific advisory
committee had considered the benchmark
for a vaccine to warrant efficacy trials.
At that time, Kambili said: “We have not found
good evidence from this vaccine that would make
us invest in it and move forward. So we have
decided to work with the Kenyan team to conduct
trials on other vaccines we have in the pipeline.”
— An AWC-Feature
