DAILY NATION
Friday December 1, 2006

German Foundation for World Population (DSW) is an international development organization
focusing on sustainable development of population in different parts of the world. DSW
particularly empowers people to make use of their basic rights and responsibilities to exercise
freedom of choice on reproductive health matters and prevention of further spread of
HIV/AIDS.
DSW Kenya Country Office is committed to addressing the sexual and reproductive health
needs of youth in Kenya by facilitating the implementation of programs which develop the
capacity of Government departments, NGOs, Community Based Organizations and youth in
addressing reproductive health challenges facing adolescents. Currently DSW Kenya Office is
supporting these initiatives in Nairobi, Coast, Nyanza, Eastern and Western regions in Kenya.
In all these areas, DSW Kenya Office is implementing adolescent sexual reproductive health
projects targeting improvement of sexual and reproductive health of youth through;
• Supporting development of youth clubs and networks using the youth to youth
approach.
• Providing financial and technical support for the establishment of adolescent and
Reproductive Health Information and Resource Centers.
• Promoting reproductive health awareness training in peer education and life skills.
• Advocating for provision of youth friendly services.
• Supporting integration of poverty alleviation strategies in sexual reproductive health
initiatives.
With support from European Commission, DSW is also in the process of implementing mobile
youth friendly VCT services in twelve districts in Kenya. The mobile VCT service initiative aims
at bringing down HIV AIDS prevalence rates among youth in the targeted communities
through generating demand for youth friendly VCT services, providing information and referral
services to youth, breaking barriers and stigma to utilization of VCT services and to enable
youth access youth friendly VCT services. The program will work closely with Ministry of
Health and National AIDS Control Program among many other partners in providing VCT
services to an estimated 36,000 youth by the end of three year period.
In marking this year’s World AIDS Day the German Foundation for World Population (DSW),
joins the Kenyan people in solidarity to mark the day as a symbol to our commitment to
Stopping AIDS and Keeping the Promise by giving youth in Kenya a chance to enjoy quality
reproductive health services and information through community and youth driven efforts. Our
massage to all Kenyans as we reflect on this day is to join the government of Kenya and all
other stakeholders in making come true the promise to stop the spread of HIV/ AIDS.