Thursday, February 23, 2006

Kenya takes stock of its capacity to fight Aids

Two decades of living with HIV and despite
it being declared a national disaster, the
country’s hospitals and health centres have
barely the basics to combat the pandemic.
Of 440 health facilities, sampled in a countrywide
survey, more than half do not have running water
or soap for washing hands.
Because of the danger of HIV infection from contaminated
blood and other body fluids it is a
requirement that health facilities have within reach
a chlorine based moisture for decontaminating used
equipment— but only three outlets in a hundred
were found to be stocking the solution.
The Kenya Service Provision Assessment Survey
2004 (HIV/Aids) was carried out by the National
Coordinating Agency for Population and Development
and the Ministry of Health with technical
assistance from a US firm ORC Marco.
The study was assessing the country’s capacity to
provide basic and advanced level services for dealing
with HIV/Aids in line with WHO developed
indicators. “We also wanted to assess the level of
record-keeping, capacity to prevent mother-to-child
transmission and the availability of youth friendly
services,” explained Dr Richard Muga, the CEO of
the coordinating agency.
The returns posted by the study painted a very worrying
scenario, for example, although other studies
indicate that the youth are at the greatest risk of
acquiring the virus, health facilities that make this
group welcome are very few. Only five per cent of
all facilities were found to have youth friendly services
and non-in whole provinces, a case in point
being Central.
Only 37 per cent of facilities do HIV tests across
the country with anti-retroviral being provided at
only seven out of a 100 outlets but in half of all hospitals.
The study, funded by USAid, DfID and Unicef, the
suggests—although it did not set out to find
whether so— that HIV testing in some facilities
could be going on without the informed consent of
the clients or that the informed consent is not being
properly recorded.
It is a requirement that the test must be provided
only after an informed consent has been received
from the client. The client must be assured that the
results are confidential. But when sampled, only
about 15 per cent of maternities and nursing homes,
for example, were found to have a written informed
consent policy while the national average was just
about half of the facilities.
Although there is a strong indication that most of
the facilities can provide the recommended TB