Sunday Nation/July 23, 2006
Africa gets cold shrug at G8

By IRUNGU HOUGHTON and LAUREN GELFAND
The gates of the Konstantinovsky Imperial
Palace have clanged shut after this year’s
summit of the world’s leading industrialised
nations, having left Africa and its fight
against poverty on the outside looking in.
After a year of promise spawned by the hopeful
development agenda from last year’s summit
of the G8 nations, the distance between
promise and performance on behalf of the 800
million people on the world’s poorest continent
has never been so pronounced.
A year on from a relief package that wiped
100 per cent of multilateral debt off the books
of 14 African nations accompanied by pledges
of an extra $25 billion per year until 2010, barely
a symbolic gesture was made in St.
Petersburg towards alleviating the woes that
keep millions of Africans in poverty, without
access to clean water or schoolbooks, basic
health care or electricity.
By downplaying the fight against poverty, the
G8 ignored the world’s most critical crisis, one
that will kill 11 million children by the time
they next meet.
In the run-up to the St. Petersburg summit, it
was clear that global priorities to enhance
Africa’s development had changed: gone were
the deals for debt-relief, support for teachers
and health care workers and commitments to
ending agricultural subsidies.
Instead there was an agenda suited to rich
countries, dominated by energy and industrial
trade. The continent was not being ignored, the
industrial super-powers were quick to reassure:
just temporarily overlooked. After all, Africa is
supposed to take centre-stage at next year’s
summit of the G8.
But as the farmers of cotton and coffee, sugar
and rice from Mali to Ethiopia to Mozambique
and Zambia know all-too-well, it’s never temporary.
Ask the millions in Democratic
Republic of Congo without basic humanitarian
services like clean water or enough to eat, or the
former child soldiers in Sierra Leone without
jobs or an education: they too have borne the
brunt of that supposed short-term indifference.
On a continent wracked by bloody and
unwieldy conflict, hamstrung by unfair trade
practices and silenced by diseases such as
AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis, temporary
has permanent consequences.
Humanitarian emergencies do not slow
down while the international community
dithers in fulfilling its commitments: they continue
their acceleration, sweeping ever-larger
swathes of countries in crisis.
Competition for dwindling resources is not
suspended in anticipation of ever-imminent
deliveries of aid: it smoulders, then intensifies,
then explodes.
Africa cannot afford another explosion: too
much has been achieved to begin an inexorable
backslide into ignominy and indifference.
Over the next 365 days, industrialised
nations must show that their attention to Africa
has not waned, that their commitments to sustainable
and durable development have not
wavered. Support for the continent must
include consistent funding for reconciliation
and rehabilitation for countries that have managed
to extricate themselves from conflict.
Peace-keeping operations must be reinforced,
well-resourced and carefully monitored
as harbingers of security. Accompanying
humanitarian needs must be addressed swiftly
and completely to prevent one country’s challenge
from becoming another country’s problem.
The coffers of the Global Fund for AIDS,
malaria and tuberculosis must be filled, so as
to reduce HIV prevalence among young people
by one-quarter and improve access to treatment
for 80 per cent of the millions living with
HIV in Africa.
Next year’s G8 summit will mark the
halfway point in the global effort to achieve
the Millennium Development Goals of halving
poverty, increasing access to education
and stopping the spread of AIDS.
To leave Africa outside the gates again, a
casualty of temporary indifference, would be a
tragedy of unimaginable proportions.
Perhaps what the continent needs over the
next 365 days, then, is a people’s jury of 800
million African men, women and children pronouncing
judgement on the world’s leaders.
Perhaps then the world could close the gap
between promise and performance, and the
continent will rise.
Mr Houghton is Pan Africa Policy Officer while
Gelfand is West Africa Media Officer for Oxfam
Great Britain