Daily Nation/ Friday, August 18, 2006

Request for a Consultant to Evaluate HACI.
The Hope for African Children Initiative (HACI) is a pan-African effort established by leading
global humanitarian organizations namely; Plan, Care, Network of African People Living
with HIV/AIDS (NAP+), Save the Children Alliance, the Society for Women and AIDS in
Africa (SWAA), World Conference on Religions for Peace (WCRP) and World Vision
International. Through this effort, these organizations work together to increase the capacity
of local communities to provide prevention, care and support services to African children
and their families affected by HIV/AIDS. The initiative specifically addresses the challenges
faced by children orphaned by AIDS in Africa, and the millions whose parents are sick or
dying from opportunistic infections caused by HIV.
HACI’s core priorities are:
1. Expanding the network of local African organizations working to address AIDS-related
challenges.
2. Providing financial, material, and technical support to communities so that they can
adequately care for children affected by AIDS, by implementing programs that
empower the family, children and communities to access social services in a
sustainable manner.
3. Supporting local advocates and religious leaders in their efforts to engage government
and encourage policy formulation pertaining to AIDS-related issues.
HACI is currently implementing OVC programs in nine (9) countries in Africa. Currently, the
HACI focus countries are Cameroon, Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, Malawi, Mozambique,
Senegal, Uganda and Zambia.
Various donors have funded HACI to-date among them the Bill and Melinda Gates
Foundation, Plan Netherlands, Plan Finland, Plan Norway, SIDA Regional HIV/AIDS Team,
and PEPFAR. After six years of program implementation, the Core partners who form HACI
and the Initiative’s Stakeholders have decided to assess the progress, achievements,
lessons and challenges of implementing OVC programming using the HACI model,
structure and approach.
This evaluation is also rooted in the genuine desire of parties involved to reflect and learn
from the project/programme undertaken. Through this evaluation, HACI would also like to
take stock of its operations and programs now that the initiative has been operational for
almost six years. The Secretariat of HACI would like to undertake a major evaluation of
HACI both at the regional and national levels. This evaluation will inform the current
process of re-thinking the strategic directions of HACI in two major areas: Program focus
and Institutional set up.
The overall objectives of the evaluation are:
I. To assess whether the set programme/project objectives have been efficiently and
effectively achieved
II. To assess how the programme/project contributed to the objectives set in the policy &
programme framework of Plan Sweden and Plan Nederland.
The evaluation will be expected to achieve a number of objectives. For each of the areas,
the evaluation will address what has worked and what has not worked and why? The
evaluation will provide a better understanding of country-specific results for children,
cost-effectiveness, fundraising horizons, universe of players addressing OVC needs, office
capacities, etc. to inform the future vision. The evaluation will also attempt to answer,
among many other questions, the following: What does the data tell us about country
operations? Should Country programs include all HACI’s four priority activities: do they add
value locally? How sustainable are they? Might it have been better to endorse a more
needs- and market-driven “menu approach” where country operations would be tailored to
needs/opportunities, aiming to fill gaps? Standing in the future, how could HACI succeed in
achieving its expectations?
Interested individuals or firms should request for detailed scope of work from
info@hacisecretariat.org not later than August 25, 2006.