Sunday Nation/ June 18, 2006

Aids: Africa pays for the sins of the big men
So we now know that the virus that
causes Aids first raised its monstrous
head in Cameroon (then a French
colony) in the 1930s or 1940s. It
apparently passed from chimpanzees
to human beings and slowly propagated
in Central Africa, well below the radar of
medical science. The story of how the virus
migrated and set up camp in Southern Africa will
probably be told another day.
On May 31, world leaders gathered at the
United Nations headquarters in New York to
discus — for the umpteenth time — the number
one health concern of our times. George Bush,
Tony Blair, and all the other leaders of rich
nations cut the meeting.
We are all now pretty familiar with the grim
statistics: 25 million Aids-related deaths since
1981; three million deaths in 2005 alone; four million
new infections in 2005, the highest on record;
38.6 million people living with HIV/Aids today;
two thirds of all affected (deaths, orphans, those
without treatment, etc) live in Africa. The only
decent news came on May 30, just before the UN
conference, when Peter Piot, UNAids Executive
Director, announced findings that suggested that
HIV infection around the world seem to have
peaked for the first time in 25 years.
In a macabre way, according to this report, the
disease had run out of new recruits in Africa and
that medicines seem to be keeping more people
alive. While South Africa has for the longest time
had the world’s largest population of infected
people (some 5.2 million at the last count), it was
recently overtaken by India; and Asia is generally
considered to be the next frontier for HIV/Aids,
mostly because of national and cultural denial.
It’s not like the rest of us have learnt much,
however. As recently as last week in South Africa,
the Health Minister, Dr Manto Tshabalala-
Msimang, was still talking about Aids like a
deranged person, or Ms Alice in Wonderland.
Appearing before the SA Parliament to defend
her ministry’s 2006/07 budget, the good doctor once
again talked up the value of an unusual diet in Aids
prevention.
“Shall I repeat garlic, shall I talk about beetroot,
shall I talk about lemon ... these delay the development
of HIV to Aids-defining conditions, and that’s
the truth,” Dr Tshabalala-Msimang said for umpteenth
time, adding emphatically that people should
also be encouraged to choose traditional over Western
medicine. There are those who think the woman
should be committed for punting for charlatans who
market dietary remedies and traditional medicines
as a cure for the world’s deadliest disease.
Many of them believe that part of the reason she
bats so ferociously for garlic is that — with the tacit
approval of President Thabo Mbeki — she does not
want to commit the South African government to
buy anti-retrovirals (ARVs) for millions of indigent
sufferers who will never be able to afford them. Dr
Tshabalala-Msimang is as such often referred to in
terms more derisive than those used to describe
Jacob Zuma, the ANC vice president who took a
shower after having unprotected sex with an HIVpositive
woman.
Apparently, Bwana Zuma, age 64, and once the
head of SA’s Moral Regeneration Campaign,
thought that a good hot shower was as good as a
condom in saving life. His former boss has been
famously — some say unfairly — misquoted as saying
that HIV is caused by poverty, not by the virus.
So go figure.
If South Africans have been committing mostly
political sins while their countrymen and women
were dropping like flies in a “Doom” commercial,
the rest of Africa has not been asleep. In Uganda,
politicians fed off the Global Fund to combat
HIV/Aids, malaria and tuberculosis, like they were
carrion eaters. A Judicial Commission of Inquiry into
corruption at the Global Fund recently reported to
President Yoweri Museveni, but by then, almost everyone
Ugandan who could read had figured it out for
herself.
The probe concluded that politicians and bureaucrats
had stolen or misused most of the $45.4 million
(Sh 3.2 billion) that was disbursed in a few short
months up to August 2005. The money was part of a
five-year $201 million (Sh 14.4 billion) grant that the
Global Fund unwisely gave to Uganda to combat the
three major illnesses. The grant was suspended but
later reinstated after the probe announcement.
The president vowed that heads would roll and
prosecutions would follow. But don’t hold your
breath. Three line ministers lost their jobs when Mr
Museveni announced his new Cabinet. But then
again, the president himself sent chits to the Global
Fund, asking them to give money to his friends.
Some of that money was even used in his political
campaigns. In Libya, the Brother Leader and his
underlings are still convinced that HIV/Aids is a
“black disease”, which might explain why they are
vigorously prosecuting five Bulgarian nurses, a Bulgarian
doctor and a Palestinian doctor whom Tripoli
accuses of deliberately infecting over 400 patients at
the Benghazi Children’s Hospital in 1998. The seven
were sentenced to death after a typically inept trial,
then saved by international protests, and are now
awaiting a retrial. Most of the infections were
apparently caused by unhygienic conditions that
even pre-dated the arrival of the foreign health
workers, including — amazing! — re-using
unsterilised syringes and needles. The Benghazi
infections have been independently blamed on
negligence, a crime that has to eventually rest at
the entrance of Brother Leader’s tent.
We’ll not get into wife inheritance in some parts
of Kenya and elsewhere. We all have a pretty
good idea why HIV has been such a fiendish
opponent in Africa. What we might never know is
how the next generation will cope with so many
homes headed by orphans; how those on ARV
therapy will cope; and how our healthcare systems
will survive after they’ve been decimated by the
“green-pasture” syndrome that deliberately lures
doctors and nurses to the northern hemisphere.
One thing is not unknown however — our priorities.
While India has overtaken South Africa in
the infection sweepstakes, all we hear are the
incredible stories of violence against women in
Azania. When people become immune to the
shock of the rape of a 12-month-old baby as South
Africans have, Dr Tshabalala-Msimang suddenly
looks more like a Dr Do Little, and less like the
Frankenstein monster.
When someone steals money earmarked for
keeping a poor woman alive (and poor), to build
his 20th bungalow as the Global Fund fellows did
in Uganda, that man should ideally catch Aids as
his comeuppance.
And when the Libyans blame foreigners for the
sudden spike in infections at a neglected paediatric
hospital, you almost wish they didn’t have that
oil — so they would know what it means to be
both poor and gravely ill.
Experience shows that peasants, whether
healthy or ailing, are mere statistics for Africa’s
big men. No wonder Bush & Co. keep finding
excuses to skip important HIV/Aids summits.
skyazze@hotmail.com