Sunday Nation/ May 7, 2006
I’m married? But I can’t tell this man from Adam!

Mail-order brides; the mass
hysteria of the Rev Moon in
South Korea; child brides;
they all must feel this way.
One day you are a happy (or
not so happy) young woman
living out your life. The next day, you are a bride.
And sometimes you don’t even know it.
From the Indian sub-continent, through many
traditional African communities, to parts of
Islamic doctrine, reluctant brides have been
given for ages, yet the latest permutation of the
practice has many women in Southern Africa
panic-stricken.
Like elsewhere in the world, marrying a local is
the easiest way of getting Permanent Residence
in South Africa. With residence, one can participate
in almost every aspect of life, save for voting.
So, men with foreign passports in their pockets
and fear of their homelands in their hearts, try
every which way to walk down the proverbial
aisle with the Nosimos, Nandiphas and Nosilelas
of this world. Except that often, the objects of
affection don’t even have a clue.
Recent investigations in South Africa’s
Department of Home Affairs reveal that corrupt
employees have been finagling Identity Numbers
of unsuspecting wenches from the national data
bank and passing them on to foreigners from all
walks of life — but mostly Bangladeshi, Egyptians,
Pakistanis, Chinese and Nigerians (no surprise
there).
Once in possession of ID details, the ‘bridegroom’
and conniving Home Affairs officer proceed
to hold a civil ceremony with the absent
bride, despite an explicit South African—and
probably world-wide—law that requires wouldbe
brides and grooms to be domiciled in the same
room for a wedding to be legal.
Anyway, after the false champagne and honeymoon,
the chap applies for Permanent Residence
as the spouse of a South African citizen and he’s
in the clear from there on. His ‘wife’ does not
even have to know about it.
That is in the ideal world of course. In the real
world, most of the victims of these sham marriages
eventually discover to their horror that they are
“married” or are committing “bigamy” . Probably
as a function of its former police-state status, South
Africa has the most intrusive government bureaucracy
of any African country, and often requires all
men, women and children to have some form of ID
on them at all times. The most useful one — and
most coveted by foreigners — is a green Identity
Document book that all South Africans get as a
birth right.
In it is a name, picture and a 13-digit number that
starts with the year in which the person was born.
The ID book has a computerised barcode and is
extremely difficult to forge. But it’s a product of
human ingenuity, so c’mon! Crooks with little incentive
for getting a real job will always find a way. And
that’s where the false brides come in.
Anyone who has ever attempted divorce knows
how traumatic and terrifying it is. It’s even more so
for the young women who go to Home Affairs to
replace lost ID books or to register their real marriages,
only to be told that they were married, and
had different—often foreign—surnames! With close
to 4,000 fake marriages uncovered over the last five
years, this can hardly be considered a crisis. However,
because most women don’t routinely visit Home
Affairs to check on their marital status, the official
figures are estimated to be off the mark by tens of
thousands.
It’s not like all the women are innocent either. It’s
been suggested that some have actually participated
in the said sham marriages (a practice that is common
in the US) and have been handsomely compensated.
But unlike in the US (rent Green Card
with Andie MacDowell and Gerard Depardieu)
where American women are often well-motivated to
break the law against false marriage, most of their
poorer cousins in South Africa often have little say
in the matter.
Naturally, the women’s lobby is fighting back.
They’ve forced the Department of Home Affairs to
display a “Scam Marriage’’ poster in every one of its
offices across South Africa. They’ve threatened to
sue the government if it grants victims of fake marriages
a divorce instead of annulling the marriage.
And they’ve forced through a new law that requires
all foreigners who marry South African citizens to
wait for five years before they can apply for Permanent
Residence.
Their hope is that this would kill off the incentive
for “marrying into” the country since it’s almost
impossible to keep up appearances for that long.
But what, you might wonder, tempts men to go to
these illegal lengths to acquire legal status in foreign
lands? Most are escaping extreme poverty (Pakistan
and Bangladesh), repression (Egypt and China) or a
combination of both.
To people fleeing from these lands, it doesn’t
really matter that South Africa has unemployment
rates of close to 50 percent, that its cities are some of
most unsafe, or that the HIV/Aids pandemic has
been so devastating it is projected to shave 10 million
off the country’s census figures by 2030. In almost
every respect also, South Africa will never be the
US, or Western Europe where asylum seekers are
almost always guaranteed a monthly cheque, free
housing as well as free education and health insurance.
Still, stealing other (especially poor women’s)
identities is not the best way of winning friends.
These women have often endured traumatic lives
themselves. Many grew up in broken homes devastated
by apartheid practices that condemned
their men to early graves, a generation in exile, or
long periods in detention.
Today, there are precious few families of black
South Africans that experienced what we can simplistically
refer to as a normal family life with a
man, his wife and their children living under the
same roof for, say, 20 years.
In the years since the end of apartheid, many
women have had to depend on the state for their
very survival because they have no skills, no land,
and no capital. Many are eligible for Disability
grants, Pension or Child allowances given to single
mothers. To these women, the ID book is their
life and to take it away is to condemn them to
death.
Incidentally, it’s often fellow South Africans,
not foreigners, who are most at fault. It is the wellpaid
Home Affairs employees who steal ID numbers
off the national data bank. It’s they who help
preside over bogus marriages; they who issue fake
marriage certificates; and they who expedite the
Permanent Residence process. And it’s they who
pocket the millions of Rands that oil these operations
each year.
In contrast to most other Africans in government
employ (excepting our avaricious Members
of Parliament), South African bureaucrats are
well-compensated indeed. So doing their job this
badly must be a manifestation of a different
malaise.
Still, whatever happened to marrying for love?
skyazze@hotmail.com