Daily Nation/ Thursday, April 27, 2006
AIDS Solution Funder Soon

Local workplace HIV/Aids management is expected to
positively and drastically change courtesy of Metropolitan Life
Kenya. A local subsidiary of Metropolitan of South Africa, the
insurance firm is set to launch AIDS Solution Funder next
month (May), to help workers living with HIV live longer.
The product, to be introduced in Kenya for the first time ever, will
ensure that HIV positive employees remain in active employment as
productive workers through proper health management. It will also
help the independent professional disease management company or
medical solutions provider, implement
effective strategies to prevent new
infections.
According to Metropolitan Life Kenya chief
executive Mr. Linus Makhulo, the firm is
currently looking for a suitable medical
provider who will undertake the disease
management programme.
The HIV/Aids product is borrowed from a
Southern Africa model developed by
Metropolitan Group Chief Executive Director,
Mr. Peter Doyle. In deciding to introduce this
concept in Kenya, the insurance firm was
encouraged by Kenya’s lower HIV/Aids
prevalence rate compared to most southern
Africa countries.
Explains Mr. Makhulo: “Peter Doyle came up with a model to
predict HIV spread in South Africa and from this it was possible to
work out estimated cost of benefits while considering use of
anti-retrovirals, counselling among other disease management tools
that now enable people to live for 20 years or more with the
infection.”
Pioneers in the provision of risk solutions to those affected by the
pandemic, Metropolitan Life was the first life insurer in South Africa
to classify Aids as a dreaded disease and, in 1996, the first company
worldwide to offer life cover to HIV positive people.
“The product is a success in southern Africa and so we feel
confident that we can do even better in Kenya which has a
comparatively lower HIV risk,” says the Metropolitan chief.