Sunday Nation/ September 10, 2006
Life’s hard; then you become a refugee

Thabo Mbeki’s policy on
HIV/Aids once again came under
even more scrutiny when more
than 130 HIV positive South
African women sought asylum in
Canada after last month’s UN
Aids conference.
The women were part of a larger group that
included conference participants from El Salvador,
Eritrea, Uganda and Zimbabwe who refused
to return home and decided to take their chances
with Canada, which rejects at least a half of all
asylum applications.
The South Africans blamed their decision on the
Mbeki government’s ambiguity on the causes and
treatment regimes for the killer disease with most
arguing that they could not be guaranteed access
to anti-retroviral medicine which could prolong
their lives. Other asylum seekers said they were
fed up with the stigma attached to their seropositive
status, while some feared discrimination
and physical abuse because of their sexual orientation.
Keeping the flame of hope
Clearly, this year’s theme for World Refugee
Day on June 20, “Keeping the Flame of Hope’’,
just didn’t do it for these would-be asylum seekers.
That they are voluntarily choosing a life in
exile is not that surprising either; and not a decision
they could have taken lightly. Truth is that
the life of a refugee is not that simple.
The South African government can’t, for example,
claim that it’s keen on using science to tackle
HIV/Aids, with Health minister Manto
Tshabalala-Msimang instead suggesting (with no
tongue-in-cheek) that a concoction of beetroot,
garlic and lemon was an effective anti-dote
against the advance of full-blown Aids. South
African media have since derisively dubbed her
“Dr Beetroot’’. So Dr Tshabalala-Msimang’s 130
countrywomen appear to be the lucky ones. But
they were lucky because many are probably educated
and could either afford tickets to Toronto, or
were able to sweet-talk someone with deep pockets
and a big heart in flying them out. There are millions
of South Africans who’re not so lucky. The
South African Medical Research Council estimates
that there are around 5.5 million South Africans
who are infected, the world’s second highest total
after India’s. Two recent council reports also estimated
that 947 South Africans die from Aidsrelated
illnesses daily, 1,443 become newly infected
every day, and put the death toll over the last 12
months at 330,000. Meanwhile, only 200,000 of the
5.5 million infected are on anti-retroviral drugs.
Who can blame someone from fleeing such purgatory?
But, as bad as the situation is in South Africa’s
heath sector, there are some people whose plight
always seems to be a lot worse. Somali refugees in
South Africa, for instance, live in fear in the Western
Cape, after a series of attacks this year, that
police blame on xenophobia which have left
between 29 and 150 people — depending on who
you believe — dead. Refugees are often vulnerable
to attacks because they tend to congregate in one
place (to create the illusion of safety in numbers).
They’ve also tended to prosper more than many
locals because they have no choice. They save more,
eat less, work harder, etc. Ironically this good fortune
might explain why they become targets of
locals (as Somalis have become in South Africa)
who are often unwilling, or unable to distinguish
their own misery from the bulging coffers of “these
foreigners”. Somali refugees have been accused of
witchcraft, spitting in public (oh yeah!), having links
to terrorism, stealing South African women, and anything
else that can conceivably be framed as a crime.
And it’s not just Somalis. Anyone who has ever been
a refugee or had relatives in this predicament knows
just how tough life is abroad. Neighbours are reflexively
suspicious, and since 9-11, it’s unfashionable to
wear the burkha, have an olive skin, sport a long
beard or be originally from any country with majority
Arab or Muslim populations. Innocent people who
fled repression in their own countries have been targeted
by angry locals in many Western countries,
including the most tolerant (Sweden, Denmark and
Holland). Victims often have nothing to do but sit
out the crises because a return home is an automatic
death sentence, while police in their adopted countries
often take sides against them.
Often, refugees would much rather be home. In the
Old Testament, the Jews (led by Moses) wandered
the Sinai desert for 40 years, as they looked for the
way back to Canaan. When Israel was finally
founded in 1948, it unleashed one of the largest refugee
populations, as Palestinians fled to Jordan, Egypt
and elsewhere. They are still waiting to return home.
The Kurds in northern Iraq, southern Turkey, Germany
and Syria want a country of their own; while
the Dalai Lama and many of his people have lived in
exile in India since 1959, when China effectively
annexed Tibet. Uganda and Tanzania had a large
population of Rwandese — mainly Tutsi — refugees
who stayed in camps and rural outposts for almost a
generation before they made a break for it behind
the Rwandese Patriotic Army (RPA) rebellion in
1990. Sadly, that civil war eventually culminated in
the 1994 genocide in which up to 1 million people
died. The RPA’s military victory itself unleashed
another refugee exodus to Congo, of up to 2 million
mainly Hutu Rwandese who were afraid of
reprisal killings. To this day, some of those men,
women and children still wander the unforgivable
jungles of the Congo.
Refugee status is not limited to those who manage
to become Diasporic by fleeing to Europe or
North America. Uganda has had a large internally
displaced population for almost 20 years. Many
have known nothing but a life in camps set up by
the government, apparently to protect them from
attacks by the Lord’s Resistance Army of Joseph
Kony. Several studies have called the conflict in
northern Uganda one of the most insidious in
recent world history because it’s taken place right
under the noses of those who claim to care. The
conflict in neighbouring Darfur region (in Sudan)
is similar.
Refugees in our midst
It is so easy to forget the refugees in our midst
(whether in Kampala or Nairobi); and perhaps
locals can’t do much because they are often as
poor and as helpless. But governments have a
responsibility to treat foreigners with some dignity
and to come to their rescue when they become
victims of xenophobic attacks. It was perhaps a
sign of the times, but there were instances in the
late 1980s when Kenyan authorities used to round
up the hundreds of Ugandans living in Nairobi
and throw them in jail. They were often just
pawns in the political games between Presidents
Yoweri Museveni and Daniel arap Moi. Fortunately,
East Africans are now often more likely to
be traders and professionals in each other’s capitals
than refugees.
Now, if only South Africans can be more accepting
of Somali refugees, who don’t even have a
functional government back home.
skyazze@hotmail.com