Daily Nation/ Thursday, February 23, 2006

Kenya takes an audit of her
HIV/Aids fighting cap
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 25

treatment (DOTS) less than half of the outlets do
not have the standard treatment guidelines, which
according to Dr Muga could compromise the quality
of treatment.
Things get even gloomier when the report turns to
the provision of advanced -level services for
HIV/Aids which require that a facility have access
to at least two of the most common medications for
treating a HIV related condition, trained staff,
treatment guidelines and a laboratory.
Full laboratory testing capacity —spinal test kits,
culturing and liver function tests—was only available
in less than 10 per cent of the facilities. This is a
very important component in the management of
HIV/Aids.
There is a strong indication that most of the facilities
have the required guidelines and protocols for
providing antiretroviral therapy. Surprisingly services
for caring for people with aids, and treating
opportunistic infections are least among private
profit making facilities.
Even among outlets offering antiretroviral about 40
per cent had stock outs indicating a worrying trend
whereby patients may not be getting the
required drugs.
“Considering that ARTs are a whole new phenomenon
and changing at a very first pace, the
requirement for trained staff cannot be gainsaid,
but we were disappointed to find this was
not the case,” says Dr Muga.
Investigators find guidelines
While the national average indicate that half
of the facilities have at least somebody trained
in the adherence of ARVs, private for profit
facilities were found the weakest with regard
to having a trained personnel in this regard.
Not in any one of the 440 facilities did the
investigators find guidelines on what is called
PEP or Post-exposure Prophylaxis —
treatment for people who are exposed to the
virus inadvertently e.g. rape victims or health
providers who may be pricked by sharp
objects.
Daily Nation/ Thursday, February 23, 2006 27
. Counselling and Testing
. Care and Support Services
. Antiretroviral Therapy
. Post – Exposure Prophylaxis
. Prevention of Mother to Child Transmission
. Record keeping
Services assessed
Kenya takes an audit of her
HIV/Aids fighting capacity