Daily Nation/ Thursday, April 20, 2006

HIV POSITIVE BOY HACKED TO DEATH
We People Living With HIV/AIDS (PLWHAS) and the rest of the stakeholders wish to make public express
our grievances and devastation on the death of 15yr old Isaiah Gakuyo, who, on the morning of Wednesday
12th April 2006 was murdered by his guardian uncle. This was beastiality of the highest order. It is
regrettable and most unfortunate that 20 years down the line of intensive HIV/AIDS intervention activities in
our dear country, stigma and discrimination still stands defiantly as an epidemic on its own. The
unacceptable murder of Isaiah could be the tip of an iceberg for children orphaned by AIDS who have either
suffered or died painfully and silently under the untold torture by their families and communities.
The hacking to death of Isaiah Gakugo leaves a painful, unforgettable and deplorable landmark in our hearts
which signifies how stigma and discrimination is embedded in our society.
The deafening silence of our leaders and relevant authorities on this matter remains a a great concern. None
has come out openly to condemn this act. No wonder the weak law enforcement and police inaction still
forms the basis of ignoring pertinent issues in Kenya, when it comes to cases related to HIV/AIDS.
Despite a recommendable progress in addressing HIV/AIDS pandemic and the positive results we have
registered, such shameful acts of stigma and discrimination poses the greatest potential to diminish the gains
already made.
We propose the following Actions to be undertaken:
Immediate action: We call on the government of Kenya, through the Police, Ministry of Home Affairs,
Children’s Department, headed by VP, H. E Moody Awori to immediately arrest and charge the boy’s Isaiah’s
murderer.
In this regard, we give the government 14 days to act, after which we shall file a court case against the state
for failing to protect Isaiah.
Long term action; we call on the government and all stakeholders to draw up a clear strategy for addressing
the needs of orphans and vulnerable children in such areas as security, care and social welfare.
We also call on all human rights activists, those concerned and interested in children’s rights and people
living with HIV/AIDS to come out very loud and clear and condemn this barbaric act. We would like to see
justice administered and the rights of Orphans and Vulnerable Children’s addressed, as outlined in the
convention of rights of the child to which African countries are signatories.
We call on all religious leaders and churches predominantly to be in the forefront, and come out strongly in
condemning and destigmatizing HIV/AIDS in our society.
Finally, we call on all Kenyans to show solidarity in mourning the cruel death of Isaiah Gakuyo, and join us
in a peaceful demonstration against this violation of human rights, on Thursday, 20th April 2006 at 10:00am
starting at the KICC Grounds, and culminating at Uhuru Park’s Freedom Corner.
TODAY IT IS ISAIAH GAKUYO, TOMORROW IT COULD BE YOU OR YOUR LOVED ONE.
NATIONAL EMPOWERMENT NETWORK OF PEOPLE LIVING WITH HIV AND AIDS IN
KENYA (NEPHAK) AND OTHER CONCERNED STAKEHOLDERS.