Daily Nation/Thursday, March 16, 2006
When to care for Aids patients at home

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 27
tion most. I am still haunted by the skeletal figure
of Makokha, in a foetal position on the floor, and
teeth bared in pain each time there was an attempt
to turn her. I feel that Makokha’s mother must be
equally haunted by the image of her once beautiful
daughter, whom she had to watch dying without
professional nursing support.
I am disturbed that the hospital withheld information
regarding Makokha’s HIV status, exposing
her mother to possible infection. I also feel that,
such knowledge would have improved the patient’s
care.
The second Butere case was admitted at the Kisumu
District Hospital. Dan Omenda’s* was diagnosed
with malaria and pneumonia, but before
admission he had tested HIV positive. But was surprisingly
discharged the next day.
Later with a hilarious sense of humour, Omenda,
who was aware of his HIV status said as he laughed
sarcastically on return to his sister’s house in a Kisumu
estate, “Go die home!” A sister who heard
him was horrified and demanded to know if that is
what he had been told.
“No,” he said.
But whether or not the discharging doctor or
nurse told him to go die at home is immaterial. The
point is that, Omenda, like Makokha, was just too
weak to be discharged at that particular time.
No wonder he died three days after discharge.
If that is the care portrayed by both mission and
government hospitals, there is no wonder that Aids
patients prefer to be sick within the comfort of the
family members, since those who end up in hospitals
are treated like untouchables.
Faced with negative attitudes in hospitals, NGOs
are now leading in making Aids patient care manageable
at home, as I found out when I visited
Kicoshep (Kibera community self help program.), a
non governmental organisation for Aids patients,
which has a hospital at Mashimoni Village just next
to the railway line.
Ms Jane Kyove, 47, an HIV carrier, who has
gone public, was brought to Nairobi a year ago by
her nephew, on account of her illness. He paid her
rent for six months before he stopped as it was
proving to be too costly for him.
Ms Kyove, who has been admitted to hospital
twice before, says she prefers home based care
because it gives her time to plan her work unlike in
hospital, where her daily routine is restricted.
Save for drugs, she describes being in the hospital
as “useless” because even there, patients are still
taken care of by their friends and relatives.
Ms Kyove also knows patients who have died in
hospital without a nurse anywhere near their beds.
Her observation is that the nurses are overwhelmed
by work.
On the other hand, Jane is not quite comfortable
about home based care. She was a patient attendant
before falling sick, so she is conversant with infection
and she fears for her Form Four school leaver
with whom she lives.
She fears that her daughter might contract Aids
from handling her as they lack protective gloves.
Kicoshep only gives gloves to their volunteer care
givers.
Still in Kibera, I visited Phoebe who also has
gone public about her Aids status. According to
her, the uninfected persons need to be careful in
order to avoid HIV infection altogether.
When I met her, Phoebe had been sick for two
days without drugs for lack of money. She said that,
at home her neighbours and relatives give her personalised
attention, unlike in hospital where care is
duty-driven.
At home, care is given with compassion. She is in
full support of home-based care. Phoebe, like Jane
makes table mats and dolls for sale to earn a living.
She had not sold any because she had been in bed
for two days, nursing a headache, a backache and
gases in the stomach.
Patient Karanja, prefers to be at home rather
than in hospital. He said at home he could move to
the sun at will unlike in the hospital. He said he
also felt at home where he is attended to on
demand by his sister who usually is with him before
his wife returns at night.
Karanja, unlike Makokha and Omenda above,
has lived to give bitter testimony of hospital care.
He told me that before he fell sick last year, his
friend died at Kenyatta hospital in September with
no nurse near him.
“I would not wish to be in that situation,” he
said, adding, his being alive today is due to his
refusal to go to hospital, his caring sister and nearness
to Kayole from where he gets his drugs from
Catholic nuns.
In spite of problems arising from shortage of cash
to give quality care to Aids patients, home-based
care givers I talked to said they are happy with
home based care because it makes families responsible
for their sick. It reduces the stigma met in hospitals
and gives patients a chance to do what they
can before they succumb, thereby improving their
self esteem.
*Names have been changed to protect privacy
The writer is a Kenya Registered Nurse.