Daily Nation/ Wednesday, April 5, 2006

Stop AIDS, Keep the Promise:
Aligning Treatment and Prevention
The spread of HIV&AIDS remains a huge challenge to our community. The number of people living with HIV in Kenya totals
to about 1.1 million adults between 15 and 49 years, another 60,000 aged 50 and over, and approximately 100,000 children.
The government of Kenya target of placing only 140,000 of eligible patients on antiretroviral therapy (ART) by end of 2006 is
a drop in the ocean. The number of people with HIV/AIDS who require treatment immediately in Kenya is 250,000. The goal
of providing treatment for all those who require it may be elusive unless there are concerted efforts by the government and
other stakeholders in improving the existing health and social infrastructure.
At the same time, those who are not infected should be kept uninfected. In regard to the impact of HIV/ AIDS on the
education sector, we are turning a blind eye to the education needs and opportunities for orphans. There are teachers and
students infected who are not receiving much needed attention among other groups who need care and support. We need
greater access to treatment and greater access to prevention now than ever before. The gains in reduction of national
prevalence levels need to be appreciated. However, we should focus our attention to pockets of areas where these gains are
being reversed.
This therefore poses a challenge to the government, donors, civil societies and HIV&AIDS service organisations to ensure
that both treatment and care for people living with HIV&AIDS and prevention services are provided side by side. While we
appreciate donor funding, stand alone initiatives that enjoy little or no ownership by communities do not make much
difference in the long run. We need to ensure that both government and donor funded projects are designed to produce
tangible results.
Established in 1990 by a group of NGOs who had begun responding to the HIV&AIDS epidemic, Kenya AIDS NGOs
Consortium (KANCO) continues to rally her members to address emerging challenges in responding to HIV&AIDS. Kenya
AIDS NGOs Consortium (KANCO), a national network of NGOs, CBOs, and Faith Based Organisations involved in
HIV&AIDS and STI activities in Kenya has been at the forefront in responding to HIV&AIDS and its impact.
KANCO’s response to the epidemic is guided by her mission to be a premier organisation committed to providing and
promoting leadership, collaboration and enhancing capacity among Civil Society Organizations for collective action towards
effective response to HIV&AIDS and its impact on the Kenya society. Currently with over 840 member organisations,
KANCO has prioritised four key programme areas, which include:
• Promoting HIV&AIDS Information Access and Documentation,
• Capacity Building for members and other stakeholders,
• HIV&AIDS Policy Development and Advocacy, and
• Grant Making and Grant Management for its members geared towards improving the ability of these
organisations to deliver vital HIV/AIDS services to those who need them in the community.
These programmes are geared towards promoting prevention for those who are not infected and providing treatment and
care for those living with HIV&AIDS. One such initiative aims at highlighting the need to continue linking prevention to
treatment. In the recent past, there has been an increase in access to (ART) or “treatment” which has brought hope to many
people living with HIV&AIDS.
It has been realised that though treatment access has increased, several opportunities in its promotion have been missed.
There is need to make people aware of the process of getting drugs easily to avoid loosing them. This mainly happens
because people are not aware of the opportunities existing or have inadequate support to enable them access counselling
and testing, and treatment opportunities.
What can you do? Simple, if in the neighbourhood you know of such people in need of HIV prevention and treatment
services, please talk to them and refer them to a nearby institution providing VCT services or one where you think the
infected person can get information on HIV testing and treatment if necessary.
As we encourage giving and caring for the needy in this season, you can help financially or seek support from your church or
school to help those affected and infected. We need to ensure that our brothers and sisters out there get support.
Prevention efforts need to focus on people who have not been reached while maintaining the ones we have been working
with.
For any meaningful results to be achieved in the fight against HIV&AIDS, both prevention and treatment must have equal
emphasis in policy-making, funding and service delivery levels. Prioritizing one over the others is counter productive in the
long run. This is because prevention and treatment initiatives are fundamentally interdependent. HIV treatment, care and
support can be a gateway to prevention and vice versa.
Prevention and treatment need to be linked in HIV&AIDS programming. In recent years policy makers and donors have shown
solid support for scaling up HIV treatment while downplaying prevention efforts. Failure to scale up prevention alongside
treatment could lead to increase in the infection rates thus placing more demand on treatment. Eventually, the number of
people requiring treatment will overwhelm providers of treatment services.
Treatment makes prevention more effective while prevention makes treatment affordable.
Where both prevention and treatment programmes exist, they are not fully integrated in the community. Simultaneous
expansion and alignment of prevention and treatment initiatives needs to be understood and adopted by a cross section of
stakeholders ranging from public, private and community sectors.
However, for this to be achieved, it is important that all partners and stakeholders “Keep the Promise”. The government and
policy makers need to ensure they meet the targets they have committed to in the fight against HIV&AIDS. Some of these
important promises are contained in the UNGASS Declaration of Commitment signed in June 2001, Millennium Development
Goals, 3 by 5 Initiative by the World Health Organisation, and lately, the goal of Universal access to prevention, care, treatment
and support for all people who require them by 2010.
Achieving these commitments requires efforts from different stakeholders. Clear roles for all stakeholders need to be defined
and challenging those responsible to be held accountable to fulfil their promise. Equitable allocation of resources to both
prevention and treatment is a key ingredient in this process. Programmes targeting both prevention and treatment should also
be intensified. Diverse stakeholders including the government, donors and organisations working in HIV&AIDS need to
empower communities to address issues of both prevention and treatment.
Greater involvement of People Living with HIV&AIDS (PLWHAs) in programmes addressing issues of HIV&AIDS is paramount.
The role of PLWHAs is a critical component of this response. They form a vital part of the response to the epidemic since they
are advocates for treatment access. Through their personal testimonies and experiences, they help to promote prevention and
community education on HIV&AIDS care and support.
KANCO is striving to advocate for the improvement of prevention and treatment services for the most vulnerable groups in
the community including youth and women. Various undertakings including training on prevention and treatment, stigma
reduction campaigns, referral services and resource mobilisation to support local communities are some of the major activities
that KANCO has conducted in supporting aligning of prevention to treatment. KANCO hopes to intensify provision of
information, advocacy and networking among NGOs, CBOs,
Faith Based Organisations and other stakeholders for
comprehensive HIV&AIDS prevention and treatment in Kenya.
We need to keep focus on the trends of the epidemic while
working together. “Lets Stop AIDS, Lets Keep the Promise.”
KANCO manages four established HIV/AIDS Resource
Centres in Nairobi, Mombasa, Nakuru and Kakamega which
acquire, process, repackage and desseminate practical, relevant
and up-to-date HIV & AIDS information. The resource centres
offer advice on how to access HIV & AIDS services as well as
answer peoples concerns in relation to HIV & AIDS including
where you can get tested or access ARVs. The resource
centres also contain a special collection for women developed
in collaboration with USAIDs “Women and AIDS Resource
Centre.”
The resource centres are open to AIDS Service organisation
and the public. Young People having fun during Pre -World AIDS Day cerebrations at Ongata Rongai,
organized by KANCO with support from Norwegian Church Aid (NCA)