Daily Nation/ Thursday, May 25, 2006

Give the Vulnerable a Life Free of Violence and Fear

Gender-based violence, or violence
against women, is a major public
health and human rights problem
throughout the world. This is not an
African phenomenon. It is a global
pandemic. Men and women must work
together to end this scourge.
Globally, one in three women will be
raped, beaten, coerced into sex or otherwise
abused in her lifetime. Violence against
women has profound implications for health
but is often ignored. The World Health
Organisation warns that “one of the most
common forms of violence against women is
that performed by a husband or male
partner.” This violence is frequently invisible
since it happens behind closed doors. Often,
legal systems and cultural norms do not treat
it as a crime, but rather as a “private” family
matter, or a normal part of life. But let’s be
clear: women who are forced to have sex by
their husbands are brutalised and lose
respect for that man.
Regrettably, sexual violence is
increasingly prevalent in Kenya. One woman
is raped every 30 minutes. A chilling statistic. But it is not just
women that are affected. The Nairobi Women’s Hospital has
treated over 100 men in the last three years. More people are
victims of such abuse but may be too scared by the stigma
attached to the crime to tell their families, let
alone report their attacks to the relevant
authorities. Society must be more
understanding, and encourage victims to seek
medical help quickly so that anti-retrovirals can
prevent HIV transmission most effectively.
Almost daily in the local media there are
reports of children, men and women being
subjected to barbaric acts of violence. In a
disturbing new trend, there has been an
increase in incidents where men target minors
for sex in the belief that it will make them
immune from contracting HIV. Some men,
already infected with HIV/Aids, reportedly rape
young girls believing that sex with a virgin will
cure them. This is a medical nonsense and a
moral outrage.
Protecting vulnerable Kenyans from sexual
violence will involve action on several fronts.
Training for police, judges and health workers
so that there is a national network who
understand how to tell the signs and help and
protect those who are suffering. This would
build on the important initiative of the Kenya
Police at Kilimani. It means men discussing
together the hazards that their loved ones face — seeking to
understand their viewpoint — and resolving how communities can
protect women and children better. And it needs better laws.
The current legislative framework was enacted in 1930 and is
wholly inadequate and inconsistent with modern society. The
existing laws do not provide for crimes such as sexual abuse of
men and boys, the intentional transmission of HIV/Aids, or
paedophilia. The Sexual Offences Bill proposes to address this by
reforming the law and enforcing harsher punishments for sex
offenders.
We welcome the ongoing debate on this issue. It is the proper
role of Parliament to debate, draft legislation and agree on
amendments. But I agree strongly with a point emphasised by so
many who have contributed to the debate on second reading —
this opportunity to put right the shortcomings of existing laws must
not be missed.
I look forward to the passing of a Bill that carries widespread
support. But the original draft must not be watered down to the
point that it no longer protects vulnerable Kenyans adequately.
For instance, I read with great concern reports that an amendment
is proposed to Clause 11– Indecent Act with a Child – reducing
the minimum sentence to a Sh.50,000 fine. Surely the very
essence of this Bill is to protect children from such barbaric acts?
To quote Nelson Mandela “Safety and Security don’t just
happen, they are the result of collective consensus and public
investment. We owe our children, the most vulnerable citizens in
our society, a life free of violence and fear.”
We know that the legislative framework is not enough on its
own. But it’s an essential starting point. It will give the women of
Kenya a legal forum in which their voice can be heard.
— H.E. Adam Wood,
British High Commissioner to Kenya