Society wants ban on Omega
FROM PAGE 1
before it had been approved and registered for sale, distribution and administration.
He said the KAS was established to provide and make available, among other things, information on Aids. It also sensitises HIV-positive people on their legal rights and any legal lacuna in the law affecting HIV/Aids.
Mr Ndambiri, in his plaint, accuses Prof Obel of failing to comply with the statutory requirements under the Pharmacy and Poisons Act.
The Act requires the testing of any newly-developed drug or poison for its safety, efficacy, quality and economic value. It must then be registered by the Pharmacy and poisons Board as a drug or poison.
Prof Obel is accused of publish 109 last March 1 that he has carried out research and has developed Pearl Omega which could cure Aids. He published information that he was manufacturing and distributing the drug for sale to any person who had tested HIV positive or who had developed Aids.
Mr Ndambiri argues that in publishing that information, Prof Obel knew or ought to have known that he had not to date submitted for approval any research protocol to Scientific Steering Committee the Kenya Medical Research Institute National Ethical Review Committee as required by law.
Prof Obel, says the lawyer, on different dates in March April, 1996, issued statements various public places and present to the public that, Pearl Omega could cure Aids.
The lawyer says the society has since established that Prof Obel representations that the drug been tested, passed for sale, registered and cleared for distribution patients by the Pharmacy and Poisons Board "an: false and untrue, misleading and misstated. "
"The substance was distributed and administered to the soc members but it did not cure the HIV/Aids, " the lawyer adds.
The lawyer adds that by his actions, Prof Obel had exposed continued to expose the society, members and other unsuspecting people to great expense and dangers.
He told the court that Prof Obel had breached the Pharmacy Poisons Act, the Science and Technology Act of the Laws of Kenya and the Helsinki Declaration



Obel to face medical bodies over his drug
will discuss Prof Obel’s professional conduct in the past and try and establish whether he has been involved in other professional controversies.
The National Aids Committee will question the scientific protocols followed by Prof Obel in the production of Peral Omega and will also look at the ethical procedures to be followed prior to the chemical trials of Pearl Omega. 
The issue of the Muliro death will be discussed spearatly said the Director of Medical Services. During the controversy over Mr Muliro’s death the Medical Practitioners And Dentists Board summoned Prof Obel for questioning, Politicians, lawyers and members of the Muliro family insisted then on a postmortem being carried out. 
Prof Obel was then quoted as saying “I did all I have in good faith and without malice”
The Minister for Health Mr Joshua Angatia on Thursday told Parliament that the drug was a hearbal concoction without any proven scientific protocol. Editorial – Page 6   
