Sex workers still HIV-resistant
Late last year, a newspaper article on HIV resistance
among sex workers in Nairobi, generated a
lot of interest. Reactions to the finding were published
in the letters to the. editor forum. Since
then, I have received many telephone calls at the
research clinic of the University of Nairobi from
members of the public wanting to know more
about this issue.
We have established that many people still
doubt the HIV resistance claim among the Majengo
commercial sex workers. We, therefore,
feel there is need to give the public more information.
The research at our clinic is a joint venture between
the University of Nairobi, several foreign
universities, and the Commercial Sex Workers
involved. It was established to study the patterns
of sexually-transmitted diseases and how they
relate to HIV and Aids. We also offer quality
STDs treatment, HIV and Aids opportunistic infections
management and promote condom use.
The research has been going on for the past 11
years and the issue of HIV resistance is one among many observations at the clinic. To the women, the clinic also acts as a club house where
they get the latest information on STDs, HIV and
AidSs, condoms, attention for their medical complaints
and counselling. They also hold meetings
on their general welfare or on methods of negotiating
safer sex with their clients. This interaction
helps us to monitor their disease progression and
to learn how to assist to cope with their problems.
They are not "used as research materials"
as sever!!l callers thought. .
About 40 out of 2,000 women who have been
followed for more than seven years and who
"ought" to have contracted the virus due to their
occupation remained disease free. Since they do
get other STDs from their work and they do not
choose their sex clients (average six, condom use
70 per cent, HIV seroprevalence among STDs
transmitters core groups' >30 per cent), then it
was demonstrated that this could not be by
chance.
These sex workers have been found to be HIV negative by any test currently known. However, this conclusion was reached from their level of natural exposure. Nobody innoculated them with the HIV virus as some people may have thought.
Currently, high-level research focusing on this
issue is being carried out and abroad. Preliminary
data suggests that the women could have
white blood cells (lymphocytes) that clear or kill
any HIV virus contracted. That clearing or killing
factor has not been isolated.
Several people have called the clinic asking to
be transfused with blood from these women.
Most of the callers seem to have done their home
work and have challenged points and observations.
Studies are being carried out to answer this
question.
Our research is published in major local and
international medical journals and presented at
international conferences. We are ready to assist
the public to get up to date information on HIV
management.
Dr Joshua Kimani.
STD/HIV Project.
Nairobi University

