{"text": "Will Aids' vicious march be halted?\nYesterday's Aids Day celebrations brought forth yet more alarming figures. The Minister for Health Gen (rtd) Jackson Mulinge said that 35 Kenyans contract the Aids-causing HIV virus every day and that 110 adult Kenyans die of Aids every day and that 1,600 children are infected with HIV every day.\nWhat this means is that 40,150 Kenyans will die in a single year from Aids and that 12,775 will contract the disease' if these figures remain constant. But the fact of the matters is that these figures are not going to remain constant. \"\nThey will increase unless Kenyans remember and adhere to a simple message that has become commonplace: That because Aids has no cure and it is 100 per cent fatal, the only way to check its spread is for Kenyans to avoid multiple sex partners and promiscuity and stick to their partners.\nThat is the only way this rampaging killer can be checked and these figures prevented from going higher and higher. The reason again is simple: Kenya is losing through Aids the best talent there is in almost every field. It is losing the youngest and brightest, the most active and productive economically and in many other fields. \nAids, as has been stated before, also affects children, the most vulnerable yet most innocent members of society. As the WHO representative in Kenya, Dr Paul Chuke, said during the celebrations in Nakuru, children are affected by Aids directly and indirectly. Directly by contracting the disease and indirectly by having parents and relatives who suffer from the disease or die from it.\nIt is not for nothing that this year's World Aids Day theme was Changing the World for Children. It was a fitting theme because children with HIV/Aids and orphaned by the disease are often sigmatised and denied services, education and care. \nAs Dr Chuke observed gender discrimination exacerbates the situation of young girls.\nAs Kenyans go about their duties today and always, they should always remember the horrifying figures referred released routinely and the fact that the reason for celebrating World Aids Day is for humankind to show solidarity with people living with HIV infection, to remember all those who have died of Aids and more importantly to plead for behaviour change."}