MONDAY DECEMBER 6 1999

Celibacy ‘hurts Aids campaign’

By MOHAMMED MAINA 
Celibacy practiced by Catholic priests is a major impediment in 
the fight against Aids, Permanent Secretary Joseph Kaguthi has said. 
The Church’s campaign against the use of condoms, Mr 
Kaguthi said, was occasioned by the fact that the priests were governed by the doctrine, which put them out of the Aids circle. 
Speaking at the weekend in Nyandarua District, the PS said the Church should be realistic and accept the available practical 
ways of checking the spread of 
the HIV/Aids. He told churches 
to leave those who could not ab 
stain from sex to use condoms as 
advised by the President. 
In view of the deterioration in
the society’s moral standards, he 
said, the only way of containing 
the spread of Aids was through 
the use of condoms. 
The Office of the President PS 
said if the church had failed to 
instil the right morals, the government was obliged to advocate the 
use of condoms to check the 
spread of the disease. 
Nyandarua District Commissioner Claire Omolo said that 40 per cent of bed occupancy in hospitals in the district was by 
HIV/Aids patients, and cautioned 
Central Province residents not tax 
in the fight against the disease in 
the false belief that the scourge 
afflicted Nyanza Province alone. 
The PS was speaking during a harambee in aid of Geta Secondary school where over Shl.5million was realised, with Mr 
Kaguthi giving Sh266,500 which included ShSO,000 from President Moi (and Sh 10,000 from Na tion Media Group Chief executive Wilfred Kiboro. The area 
Member of Parliament Mwangi Githiomi gave Sh30,000. 
Meanwhile, the clergy in Meru town were sharply divided yesterday over whether President Moi was right or not to encourage the 
use of condoms in the control of 
Aids spread. 
Former Presiding Bishop of the 
Methodist Church in Kenya, Rev Lawi lmathiu, and the East African Pentecost Church Pastor, Rev 
Douglas Ikunyua, said non 
practising Christians should be free to use condoms.



