SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 27, 1999

Aids sabotages donor efforts says Wackman

The Aids scourge has undermined 
donor efforts to implement and 
promote sustainable development. 
World Bank country director 
Harold Wackman said yesterday. 
Mr Wackman told an MPs’ 
symposium on Ads in Mombasa 
that the bank had made the pandemic one of its main targets. He 
pledged the bank’s help in fighting the scourge. 
Mr Wackman urged leaders to 
speak more often and openly 
about the epidemic and to ensure 
it is addressed in all sectors. 
“There is so much more we can 
do and there is so much we can 
do better and there is a lot we 
should stop doing,” he said. 
Leaders should desist from using the epidemic and its dreadful consequences for political purposes, he said, adding that individual motivation derails and dismantles efforts to tight Aids. 
“I urge you to forget your political, religious
or cultural differences and join forces to fight the real enemy; HIV/Aids epidemic in Kenya. The HIV infection 
does not recognize your political 
parties, your religion or your 
tribes. Fight together to protect 
our future and that of our children,” he said. 
He urged political leaders not 
to leave the tight to medical professionals alone. He said it was 
shocking that out of every 100 
adults in Kenya, 14 are HIV 
positive. . 
The World Bank, he said was
concerned with the impact of 
Aids on human development saying life expectancy in Africa had 
been reduced by 15 years. 
‘Profits in many countries 
have decreased by almost 20 per 
cent as a direct result of 
HIV/Aids. The World Bank estimates that countries with high 
H1V prevalence will lose I per 
cent GDP growth per capita 
annually,” Mr Wckman said. 
It is estimated that Kenya’s 
cumulative loss as a result of 
Aids will be 15 per cent over the 
next decade, he said. 
He called on the government. 
leaders and society to rigorously 
create policy, legal and fiscal 
space to allow the civil society to 
flourish and contribute to counter 
the source. 
He urged the Government to 
make condoms more accessible 
by ‘lowering the inconvenience 
of acquiring” them. It should 
also urgently finalize the cost- 
sharing policy and improve transparency particularity in the treatment costs for sexually transmitted diseases and Aids 
related illnesses.


