Why circumcision cannot be wished away
Concerns have been expressed regarding
the hygienic conditions
under which circumcision is carried
out.
Indeed, the inevitable infections
which occur during traditional
circumcision are themselves
fertile ground for the
transmission of the HIV virus.
Our aids against Aids lie
in training traditional
circumcisers in hygienic procedures. In communities where circumcision
has been part of preparation
for marriage and family life, it has
been performed at puberty for
many centuries to signal the end
of childhood and the beginning of
adolescence and readiness to start
assuming adult social responsibilities.
In some communities, circumcision
is performed with other activities
for marriage preparation.
Furthermore, circumcision is
valued by the communities that
practiced it.
One of the reasons why it has
been difficult to eradicate female
circumcision is because the fight
against it has been medical and religious,
and this has not taken into
consideration the deeply-held cultural
values attached to it.
The condemnation has led to
strong reaction, making the practice more entrenched and
continues secretly.
In such situations, those condemning
circumcision have failed
to recognise that these operations
are performed as a puberty rite to
symbolise specific marriage preparation
activities.
The adolescent girls are thereby
made physically and psychologically
aware of having changed at
puberty from childhood to adolescence
and young adulthood and
instructed on how to behave in
marriage.
Similarly, the young man will
also have been initiated and culturally
programmed to look out  for these behaviour and physical
changes. For such a strongly entrenched
custom, the question
therefore remains as to what can
replace it and with as much appeal
in stabilising the bond between a
married couple. To abolish the custom, it will be
necessary to develop alternative
programmes which are consistent
with modern education and lifestyles
and whose basis is appealing
to the people who are involved
in the change. The role of religious education
and social ethics in our school system
should be to propagate these
ideals.
Our aids against Aids lie
in enabling parents at
home and teachers in
schools to impart knowledge
and values to guide
sexual maturation
Traditionally, reproductive functions
have had the highly 'cherished
value of the survival of society.
This is one of the reasons why
cultural activities that accompany
circumcision have such strongly held
religious significance. This is one of the reasons why
various attempts to stop the practice have been resisted as it is seen as a threat to the social fabric
of the community which practises it.
There are, however, four problems which may be associated with the spread of Aids through circumcision:
The problem of unhygienic conditions under which the operation is carried out;
The circumcised males and females take their new status as a license for engaging in promiscuous
sexual activities;
The circumcision period is accompanied
by excessive drinking
of alcohol which leads to drunkenness
and irresponsible sexual
behaviour;
The actual lessons which have
been given to the young people
and symbolised physically by circumcision are no longer being given effectively. This is because
the parents and the community assume that they are being given through formal education.
Our aids against Aids lie in ensuring that the real
lessons on adolescent development, courtship
and marriage are given effectively whether
there is circumcision or
not.
Pandemic rises among women
NEW YORK. Wednesday
The Aids pandemic in the developing world
has spread dramatically among women and
girls, the United Nations Children's Fund has
said.
"What was once a predominantly male
disease has become a heterosexually spread
pandemic which is now consigning tens of
millions of girls and women to a cruel, slow
death due to Aids" Unisef Executive Director Carol Bellamy said in a statement. 
According to Unisef statistics, women and girls now account for 43 per cent of the estimated
33 million people worldwide living
with HIV/Aids.
In Brazil, in 1984, only one woman was
HIV-positive for every 99 men infected with
the virus. Today. women account for one fourth
of all those infected with HIV.
In Africa, the risk for girls aged 15-24 is
two to one, compared with boys. In sub-Saharan
Africa, infected women outnumber
men six to five.
In Western Kenya, almost one in four girls between 15 and 19 is living with HIV, compared
to only one in 25 youths in the same age
group. In Zambia, 16 times as many girls are
infected as boys.
Ms Bellamy said the spread of HIV/Aids
among women is being helped by an atmosphere
of pervasive gender-based discrimination,
and cannot be divorced from sexual coercion
and the fact that between 16 and 52 per
cent of all women worldwide suffer abuse
from an intimate partner at least once in their
lives. (AFP)

