Ex-Soviet nuclear base home to drug addicts
KHMELNITSKY (Ukraine),
. Monday
Drug addicts tending pigs and
chickens at a top secret Soviet nuclear
missile base - the very idea
would have had Cold War generals
packing their bags for Siberia ..
Yet that pastoral scene has become
a reality at the former base
of the Red Army's Fifth Strategic
Missile Regiment, hidden away
among the hills and barren fields
of western Ukraine.
Soviet troops pulled out from
Khmelnitsky after the Union collapsed
in 1991. Now only a crumbling
concrete obelisk screaming
"Glory to the Soviet Strategic
Missile Forces!" stands as a reminder
that· here nuclear apocalypse
was once just the touch of a
button away.
A nearby silo housing one of
176 intercontinental ballistic missiles
originally stationed in
Ukraine was blown up early last
year in line with the United States-
Soviet START arms reduction
treaty. Ukraine has handed. over
all its rockets to Russia.
But despite the Soviet military
retreat, well-worn khaki uniforms
are still much in evidence at
Khmelnitsky. They are regulation
issue for the 15 or so hardened
drug addicts undergoing a rehabilitation
course at the base.
And like the soldiers who once
paced their lives to the shrill sirens
of nuclear alerts, they perform
their daily chores at a rhythm set
by a gong hammered by the three
men in charge, the "masters",
who are themselves reformed
addicts.
"Our method is a combination
of work therapy and psychological
correction," said Mr Anatoly
Fedoruk, 35, one of the masters
who spent 18 years of his "former"
life on drugs.
He believes that the rigorous
order established on the former
base and daily labour can heal the
addicts.
"The effect of labour is such
that a person changes and starts
thinking in a new way," he said.
•'Our patients just have no time to
think about narcotics."
In line with a programme designed
by the Khmelnitsky regional
authorities in January last
year in an attempt to save the lives of at least some of the thousands
of locally registered drug addicts,
a group of enthusiasts was allowed
to open the rehabilitation
centre. They called it "Viktoria".
Strict discipline reigns. All patients
must sign a pledge to abstain
from drugs, alcohol and sex,
to be honest and not to leave the
territory of the base.
As in the army, orders are orders,
insubordination is never discussed
and the lonely base, 20 km
from the nearest village, seems an
ideal location for the camp.
Every morning, each patient is
given work orders for the day.
Daily chores range from tending
pigs and chickens at a former military
storehouse to repairing barracks
left in a mess after the last
Soviet soldiers retreated a few
years ago.
. 'Only by going through a.
centre like this can you become
human again," said 30-year-old
Natasha, who once ran a bookshop.
Viktoria is her third attempt at quitting drugs.'
. Ms Larisa Vysotska, director of
the centre, said around 1,500 drug
addicts are officially registered in
the Khmelnitsky region, while the
number of those not reflected in
official statistics may be 10 times
higher.
There are no official statistics
for Ukraine as a whole, where the
50 million population includes a
growing army of desperate young
people seeking refuge from hardship
in drugs,
Ms Vysotska said centres similar to Viktoria would be opened in
several other western regions, as well as in the capital Kiev, ill
Odessa on the Black Sea and in
Donetsk region in the east.
But she said the planned new
centres were unlikely to be able to
cope with the growing ranks Of
drug addicts. '
"We understand we canngt
help everyone. But if we only save
a few lives, our efforts won't be
wasted," she said. Ms Vysotska said she had managed
to save her own son, who
used to take drugs, through a similar
centre in neighbouring Poland.
Mr Fedoruk said that turning
former addicts into educators was.
a key to success. "A lot of people
think a junkie can't quit. But we
prove here that this is possible,
that drug addicts can be the same
as every other human being," he
said.
Natasha, who also carries the
HIV virus which leads to Aids as a
result of sharing an infected needle,
has been at the centre for 10
months and her term will be end in
two. She would like to help the
others to escape addiction when
her own treatment is over.
"Drug addiction is a horrible
disease, incurable for many, but I
want to help people to break free
of that nightmare,". she said. "I
would like to become an educator,
a master. I was given help. and
.now I would like to help the others
... (Reuters)

Piles of antlered reindeer heads: None of the animals was fit for human consumption following an
explosion and a fire at the Chernobyl nuclear plant in the former Soviet Union.

Troops of the now defunct Soviet Union pulled out of Khmelnitsky, in the Ukraine, the former base of the
Red Army's Fifth Strategic Missile Regiment, after the Union collapsed in 1991. Now only a crumbling
concrete obelisk screaming "Glory to the Soviet Strategic Missile Forces!" stands as a reminder that
here nuclear apocalypse was once just the touch of a button away, writes PAVEL POLITYUK.

