Aids trials raise vital queries
I have reservations about the Aids vaccine trials
going on in Nairobi. The vaccine contains
live strains of the HIV virus that have been
modified to reduce their reproduction and activity.
Little is known about the dangers of the
disabled viruses.
A renowned researcher in New England,
Massachusetts, United States, has raised concern
about using inactivated HIV viruses as a
vaccine. This kind of testing is outlawed here.
Viruses exist in the form of DNA. They
attack white blood cells by launching a coup
d'etat. They take charge of white blood cell
and multiply.
No process can guarantee that 100 per cent
of the viruses will be disabled in a given sample.
Injecting a 70 per cent disabled sample
into a healthy one leaves 30 per cent viruses to
multiply. The research hopes to demonstrate
that the 30 per cent of the live viruses does not
lead to development of Aids. It does not always
work. Beware Kenyans.
It would appear the researchers are out to
exploit poor ignorant Kenyans. This raises the
old age questions about racism.
Ibrahim Kagwima Mureu.
Boston. US.

Are Kenyans really naive or is it that we have no qualms about selling ourselves'? The idea of
testing an Aids vaccine appears great taken at
face value, but the issue is why this has to be
done in Kenya and South Africa.
This calls for closer scrutiny. Granted, the
number of Aids cases here is high but is this a
reason to use Africans as guinea pigs'? There
are hundreds of Aids cases in the United States
and Britain. They should have. been the first
people on which to carry out the Aids trials.
With the blessing of our medical experts the
West can introduce anything and test it on
people. This is despicable and should be immediately
stopped.
Can the Director of Medical Services, Prof
.Iulius Meme, make available to the public statistics
showing the number of individuals tested
and levels of success or failure'? They
should be readily available as I assume they
formed part of the criteria for allowing this
testing to be performed.
Incidentally if these statistics existed they
would be public information in Britain and the
United States. Does the promise of upgraded
medical facilities, free funding(!) and international
recognition outweigh African lives, Prof
Meme'?
Is it not strange that the drugs known to
work against Aids infections are deemed expensive
and unavailable to the Third world, but
a yet untested "vaccine" is to be injected into  Kenyans at no cost at all to them') Except, of
course. the risks involved in _testing this
substance! '
If these researchers really care, then they
should make the "expensive" drugs available
to us. They may certainly continue to explore
the "vaccine" possibilities in their laboratories.
or if they wish, on their own populace.
Milton Muigai.
Stockholm ..
The Kenyan volunteers to be to injected with
the. Aids virus stand a high chance of developing
HIV. Why'? That vaccine has never been
tested in the societies where it was developed, I
believe that ProfMeme knows the reason.
Prof MacMichea I said that "it will take five
to 10 years before you and him can know
whether this vaccine works or fails".
Those poor volunteers would have to die.
for Prof MacMicheal to conclude that the vaccine
does not work. Why sacrifice lives for experiments'?
Prof Meme, it's your job to protect the
health of all Kenyans as the man in charge of
medical services. It is, therefore. surprising
that the OMS is offering his fellow Kenyans
for life-threatening experimental trials, and
worst bf all, in exchange for "international
recognition" . Doris Adhiambo.
United States.
Ignorance fuelling HIV spread
Much has been said and many
newspaper articles and books
written on the Aids scourge, but
the. solution or cure remains elusive
worldwide.
Aids, as many have come to
realize, is a condition that grips
and reduces a once healthy person
to a mere walking skeleton! It is a
dreadful thing that must be fought
by all in society.
Educative books have been
written and awareness campaigns
mounted to curb against the
spread of HIV/Aids, in vain.
Why? Because it is not easy to
change man's attitude.
While we know most of the
cases of this killer disease in'
Kenya have been spread through
sexual intercourse, we continue to
bury our heads in the sand, not
willing to change our sexual
behavior.
As we approach the next century, we should try to eradicate ignorance.
Also, the issue of making
ourselves popular for a little while
should be done away with for it
makes us regret later.
I was surprised to hear that
some people are shocked to learn
that there are still misconceptions
among our people (especially illiterate
rural inhabitants) about
Aids. In some remote hinterlands
of Bungoma and Busia districts,
some people still believe that Aids is a curse from God or something
to do with the family planning
campaign.
Recently, some members and
officials of a non-governmental
organisation escaped unhurt when
rowdy locals in Bungoma confronted
and threatened to cut them
up.
They said they would not allow
these people to preach about a
non-existent Aids threat. To these
people, the Aids campaign is a
ploy to deny them their sexual enjoyment.
It is these people who indeed
require thorough education about
the Aids menace.
Parents, teachers, leaders and
counsellors should be on the
frontline in campaigns to discuss
Aids, especially at forums for
young people.
It is painful to note that as the
number of those afflicted with
Aids increases, many young
people are being forced out of
schools and colleges to look after
their sick parents at home.
Wananchi should understand
that Aids is there. It should be understood
that it is found everywhere,
not only in the towns. It is
in remote areas like Ndivisi, Kamukuywa
or Malakisi in Bungoma
District.'
Antony Onglao Nyongesa.
Kimilili.

