Step up campaign against Aids
The Press is doing a good job in disseminating information on HIV/Aids. A lot has been written
about the alarming spread of the HIV virus
in Kenya. Day in day out, we read new threatening
statistics.
We have been informed that there is a higher
incidence of Aids among married couples,
than among single people. Polygamy and immorality
are some of the major causes.
Government officials speak out against polygamy
at every workshop, seminars and any
other public forum they get. The clergy speak
out against immorality in most of their sermons
these days. Therefore, every adult Kenyans
must have heard the Aids message loud
and clear.
The problem is not that people have not
heard of the HIV virus and Aids. The problem
is that they do not realise, comprehend, acknowledge
and accept the seriousness of the
Aids menace.
Some people believe that because they have
been fortunate enough to enjoy good health
throughout their lives, their luck won't run out.
Others believe Aids is a diseases that is acquired by "other people", but "not me."
So long as these attitudes continue among
Kenyans, the Aids toll will keep on rising.
Aids is now an integral part of our system. It
transcends all tribal and social barriers. It has
taken its toll among pre-teens, teens, young
adults, the middle-aged and the old.
We must, therefore, create more awareness
,about the scourge and its implications at all
levels of our society. There is currently a commission
of inquiry into the education system.
This commission is collecting views on how
the current system can be changed or
improved.
Headteachers and parents should tell the
commission about the need to make Aids education
an integral part of the school syllabus.
Every child from the age of 10 should be educated on the various ways the HIV virus can be
contracted and the methods of prevention, Perhaps,
it should be taught as a section in the biology
syllabus.
Alternatively, it could be taught as a daylong
class in Christian Religious Education
classes. It is up to education experts to tell us where the subject can be taught to have maximum
impact.
I urge the ministry of education to seek
funding from Unicef for the production of documentaries,
which can be distributed free to
every school. I am sure discussions with Unicef
should yield some literature,
Visual messages can have a great impact. I
believe if more Kenyans saw the pain and suffering
Aids victims go through, they would
take preventive measures more seriously.
Our economy is in dire straits. The only way we can win the battle against the spread of
Aids is for the government to take up the challenge
to seek funds to ensure the dissemination
of information on this scourge ..
Everybody has a responsibility. The clergy
should continue to preach about the consequences
of immoral behaviour. Churches are
the right venues for public talks and lectures on
Aids. A government-led, church-supported approach will have a tremendous impact in the
fight against Aids
Anna C. Kendall.
Nairobi.
