THURSDAY DECEMBER 2 1999

Orphans give Aids 
a whole -new face 
Throughout sub-Saharan Africa and around the world, the damage 
being wrought by HIV/Aids has a new face — the millions of children 
who have been orphaned by the pandemic, left behind to struggle not only with their personal losses, but with the stigma and discrimination 
 that often accompany Aids. In a new report. “Children Orphaned by 
 Aids Front-line responses from Eastern and Southern Africa.”, the 
 United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and the Joint United 
 Notions Programme on HIV/Aids (UNAIDS) say that the number of children orphaned by Aids is skyrocketing and that the traditional African extended family is breaking down under the unprecedented 
 burden of the pandemic. 
 Aids orphans are defined as children- numbers of Aids orphans it 
who, before the age of 15, addition to the loss of life caused 
 have lost either their mother or by Aids - patting a severe strain 
 both parents to Aids. on Traditional support systems in 
 “The figures are staggering: By Africa. The grandparents who in 
 the end of this year the world will
have seen  1.2 million children
orphaned children their orphaned grandchildren 
 orphaned by Aida, 95 per cent of have limited resources,” Carol Bellamy 
 them in sub-Saharan Africa,” said, 
 Peter Piot; Executive Director of “What makes this epidemic 
 UNAIDS. “By the end of the year uniquely threatening to children 
 2000, we estimate that the is the age factor,” Dr Piot said. 
 number of Aids orphans will rise “Half of all people with HIV 
 to more than 13 million.” become infected before they turn 
 “The scale of the orphan crisis 25, and they typically die of Aids 
 it’s almost unimaginable,” said white their children are still too 
 UNICEF excessive director Carol young to fend for themselves. 
 Bellamy. “Before Aids, about 2 Given that Aids has claimed over 
 per cent of alt children to developing- 16 million lives so far - and that 
countries were orphans. By the death toll is expected to keep 
 1997, the figure had jumped to 7 rising the ramifications for the 
 per cent of many African - children left behind are clearly 
 - m same countries the figure enormous,” 
 The figures run as high as 11 Per cent. Some African communities 
 “Worse, the skyrocketing have developed innovative care 
 and support programmes. But 
 while communities are clearly 
 unit in the forefront of the 
 response, the sheer numbers of 
orphans threaten to overwhelm 
 their efforts. 
 There turn lessons to learnt 
 From case studies of how the 
 orphan crisis is being dealt with 
 in Botswana, Malawi, Zambia 
 and Zimbabwe. Bellamy pointed 
 out that, while still in die to infancy, the efforts spotlighted provide 
 reason for hope. 
 Eastern and Southern Africa, 
 the focus of the Aids orphan 
 report, is home to 4.8 per cent of 
 the world’s population yet has 
 over 50 per cent of the world’s 
 HIV positive people and accounts 
 for 60 per cent of all lives 
 claimed by Aide since the epidemic began. 
 * A call for action 
 To address the situation, 
 UNICEF, UNAIDS and the 
 National Black Leadership Commission on Aids, a US group 
 active in Aids causes, has issued a 
 “Call for Africa”, at the end of a symposium on Aids orphans at 
 the United Nations in New York. 
 They urged governments to 
break the conspiracy of silence” 
 Aids and act with “openness 
 and urgency’ to fight the discrimination and ostracism that 
 often accompany Aids. 
 AZT: Activists criticise Mbeki
 
 CAPE TOWN, Wednesday sex or use condoms to prevent the South Africa,” leading Aids  
 Aids campaigners criticised spread of the disease that attack campaigner Clero Jones said. “Il is 
 South African President Thabo Mbeki body’s immune system. It is 
 Mbeki at World Aids Day for AZT can inhibit Aids and scientifically misinformed. It I economically unsound and it is
morally bankrupt," to give the drug AZT to vent infection in the womb, morally bankrupt,” he told a pregnant women with HIV. “I have asked to say to crowd in Cape Town gathered to 
Mr Mbeki, avoiding the con- President Mbeki and parliament watch the unveiling of parts of the controversy he has sparked by spies- that this decision is contrary to the Aids Memorial Quilt started by the safety of AZT, urged principles of the African National Mr Jones and earned round the South Africans to abstain from Congress and the constitution of globe streets yesterday to mark the world Aids 

