FRIDAY NOVEMBER 19 1999

Ministry OF HEALTH
THE NATIONAL AIDS AND STDS CONTROL PROGRAMME OF KENYA (NASCOP)

The Ministry 01 Health estimates that
200, 000 Kenyans died of AIDS
between 1984 and 1995. II AIDS
prevention and control measures are
not pursed more aggressively and
Kenyans change their sexual behaviour_
in order to reduce the number 01 new
infections, up to one million men,
women and children may die 01 AIDS
by the year 2000. In 1995, AIDS was
reported to be the leading killer of men
and women aged 15-39 years in
sub-Saharan Africa. The incidence of
deaths due to AIDS is still increasing
because 01 the existence 01 a large
pool 01 people with HIV infection. It is
projected that the number 01 deaths
due to AIDS among people aged 15-39
years in Kenya during the period
1995-2000 may be three times the
number 01 deaths due to all other
diseases combined. AIDS affects
development and security.
AIDS kills young economically
productive people, brings hardship to
families, increases expenditure on
health care and adversely affects the
country's development. By depriving
the economy 01 qualified and
productive labour force, restricting the
tax base, and raising the demand lor
social services due to the increased
number of orphaned children, widows
and the high cost of health care, AIDS
poses a great challenge to Kenya's
development. The loss of skilled
uniformed officers has security
implications.
In order to overcome these challenges,
a strong political commitment at the
highest level, implementation 01 a
multi-sectoral AIDS prevention and
control strategy with priority locus on
young people, mobilisation of
resources for financing HIV prevention,
care and support, and establishment of
National AIDS Council to provide
leadership at the highest level possible
are critical.
AIDS is a new disease. The first case
was reported in the United States 01
America in 1981. It is caused by
Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV).
HIV is. transmitted through sexual
contact, infected blood and from an
infected mother to a child. By the end
01 June 1996, the World Health
Organisation estimated 28 million
people world-wide to have been
infected with HIV and 5 million dead
due to AIDS.
a) Establishment of National AIDS
Committee and the development
Exposure to infected blood occurs
through transfusion of blood and blood
products, injections, traditional surgical
practices, and skin-piercing where
instruments are shared.
It is projected that by the year 2000, the
cumulative number 01 people infected
will be 30-40 million. Ninety percent 01
these people win be in developing
countries. Analysis 01 HIV infections by
geographic
distribution reveals that the highest
concentration 01 the epidemic is in the
sub- Saharan Africa accounting for
approximately 70% of all HIV infections
world-wide. Kenya is one of the
countries in this region most affected
by this epidemic. The main reasons 
the rapid spread 01 AIDS in Africa are
not clearly understood. However,
ignorance, poverty, high incidence 01
sexually transmitted diseases,
socio-cultural beliefs and practices, civil
war and deficient public health
infrastructure are the main factors.
In Kenya, AIDS was first recognised in
1984. The number of new AIDS cases
reported in one year has been on
average 12,000 since 1990. However,
due to under reporting, missed
diagnosis and delays in reporting,
reported cases only represent the tip of
the iceberg. The valid estimate may be .
three times what is reported. Men and
women are infected in equal
proportions. 80% of the cases occur in
the age-group 15 to 49 years while
10% are children under the age of 5
years. The epidemic is more advanced
In Nyanza, Western and parts of Rift
Valley provinces where IRV prevalence
rates among pregnant women are 15%
to 30%. It IS estimated that if current
infection rates continue, the number of
people infected will increase from 1.1
million in 1995 to 1.7 million by the turn
the century. Sexual contact accounts
for up to 90% of AIDS cases in Kenya.
Heterosexual contact is the main mode
Of transmission. However, bisexual
contact has been reported in some
parts of the country particularly Coast
Province, and among confined groups
like Prisoners. Homosexual contact has
not been reported in Kenya. Mother to child transmission is' growing in
Importance because 01 the high HIV
infection rates among young women.
This mode 01 transmission together
with exposure to infected blood
accounts for about 10-20% 01 AIDS
cases in Kenya.
1.1 Government response to AIDS
When the first case 01 AIDS was
recognised in Kenya, the Government
responded by establishment of National AIDS
Committee and the development
was established in 1985 to advise
the Government on all matters
related to the prevention and
control of AIDS. AIDS Programme
Secretariat (APS) was
established in the office of the
Director Medical Services to
co-ordinate programme activities.
These steps led to the
establishment of Kenya National
AIDS Control Programme in 1987
which was then followed by the
development  live year
strategic plan, Medium Term Plan
(1987-91). This plan emphasised
creation of awareness about
AIDS, blood safety, clinical
management of AIDS
opportunistic infections and
capacity building for management
of AIDS control programme at
national level. The main
strategies pursued were the
prevention sexual transmission,
prevention of transmission
through blood, prevention 01
mother to child transmission and
disease surveillance. Second
Medium Term Plan (1992-96)
continued to pursue the same
strategies but in addition
emphasised the need to involve
an sectors in HIV prevention in
order to mobilise broader National
response against the epidemic.
The new plan also emphasised
the need to provide care and
social support to people inlected
with HIV, their families and
community; the need to reduce
the social and economic
consequences HIV/AIDS and
the strengthening national and
district capacity to respond to the
epidemic.
b) Recognition of AIDS as a
development issue
This led to devoting a whole
chapter on AIDS hi the Seventh
National Development Plan and
the Filth District Development
Plans.
c) Recognition of STD control as a
priority intervention
The recognition that Sexually
Transmitted Diseases facilitate
the spread of HIV led to
integration 01STD control into
AIDS Control thus establishing
NASCOP in 1992.
d) Resource mobilisation
The Government received
considerable support from
multilateral and bilateral donors in
the financing of AlDS control
activities during the first half the
first MTP. However, it became
apparent to the Government that
while the epidemic was getting
worse, funding from donors was
rapidly declining. In 1993, the
Government approached the
World Bank l a credit to help
finance HIV prevention and care.
The world Bank approved a
credit of US' 40 million from the
International Development
Association (IDA) in 1995 for
Sexually Transmitted Infections.
The Government appeals to
donor agencies for assistance
towards HIV prevention and care.
The annual requirement for HIV
prevention alone is estimated to
be 40 million Kenya Pounds. This
excludes the cost of care. Cost
benefit analysis in Kenya has
shown that for every shilling
invested in HIV prevention, there
are thirty shillings net savings in
benefits. Effective resource
mobilisation and use 0f these
resources require that an
appropriate policy framework be
put in place to guide programme
implementation, particularly
where many actors inCluding
Non-Governmental
Organisations, Community Based
Organisations and the private .
sector are involved. Hence the
preparation of this paper.
1.2 Major achievements
Evaluation of the impact of interventions
a) High Level of awareness attained
National Survey in 1993 revealed
that 90% of men and women
(15-49 years), were aware 01
sexual transmission of AIDS
irrespective of urban-rural
residence, level 01 education or
province 01 residence. However,
misconceptions about the modes
of transmission 01 HIV,
particularly mosquito bites and
kissing, were very high(50% 01
respondents). There IS still need
to intensify AIDS awareness
particularly among young. people
and people living In rural areas
Safe blood transfusion
Infrastructure for screening of
blood for HIV has been
established. This includes the
availability HIV blood
screening facilities in most district,
provincial, mission and private
hospitals, supply 01 HIV testing
reagents, maintenance of HIV
screening machines, training 01
laboratory personnel and
education 01 blood donors. This
has ensured that 98% 01 blood 
transfusion is screened for HIV in
Kenya. However, the
maintenance 01 this infrastructure
to make it responsive to the
rapidly changing technology in
HIV screening has put
considerable strain on the
National AIDS Programme due to
resource limitations. Kenya
Pounds 10 million is required
year to maintain an
effective HIV blood screening
programme.
c) Advocacy
The National AIDS Programme
has been instrumental in
advocacy on critical issues
pertaining to law, ethics, culture,
vulnerability of women, and youth
among others. The programme
has developed partnerships with
NGOs Community Based
Organisations and international
agencies working in the area 01
AIDS, human rights and
development.
d) HIV Surveillance
Surveillance systems for
monitoring the trend 01HIV
epidemic and AIDS cases is
established. Kenya is one of the
few countries in the world with an
elective HIV sentinel surveillance,
AIDS case surveillance
programme and reliable
epidemiological database on
AIDS. District capacity to
implement HIV prevention has
been realised through the
establishment 01 District
Inter-sectoral AIDS co-ordinating
Committees which bring together
representatives 01 Government
departments, NGOs and
Community Based Organisations.
The Ministry of Health has since
1995 decentralised AIDS
activities to the districts by issuing
authority to incur expenditure to
District Medical Ollicers lor AIDS
control.
NGOs participation
Many NGOs and Community
Based Organisations are involved
in HIV prevention and care
activities. A consortium ol         NGOs
working in HIV prevention and
care exists. been made in Kenya to control
the spread of HIV and to reduce
the impact ol AIDS on individuals,
Families, communities and the
Nation as a whole, the epidemic
remains powerful and dynamic,
evolving with changing and
unpredictable patterns in different
communities. In communities
where the epidemic is advanced
.and appears to be levelling in the
general population, infection rates
are increasing\) among young
women. Within these
communities, a new epidemic 01
orphaned children and widows
has emerged.
Objectives of Sessional Paper on AIDS
The aim 01 the Sessional Paper on AIDS
is to provide a  policy framework within
which AIDS prevention and control efforts
will be undertaken lor the next 15 years
and beyond. Specifically:
The SPA will give direction on
how to handle controversial
issues 6 while taking into account
prevailing circumstances and the
socialcultural environment.
laboratory personnel and
education 01 blood donors. This
has ensured that 98% 01 blood lor
transfusion is screened for HIV in
Kenya. However, the
maintenance 01 this infrastructure
to make it responsive to the
rapidly changing technology in
HIV screening has put
considerable strain on the
National AIDS Programme due to
resource limitations. Kenya
Pounds 10 million is required
leveI}' year to maintain an
effective HIV blood screening
programme.
c) Advocacy
The National AIDS Programme
has been instrumental in
advocacy on critical issues
pertaining to law, ethics, culture,
vulnerability of women, and youth
among others. The programme
has developed partnerships with
NGOs, Community Based
Organisations and international
agencies working in the area 01
AIDS, human rights and
development.
d) HIV Surveillance
Surveillance systems for
monitoring the trend 01HIV
epidemic and AIDS cases is
established. Kenya is one of the
lew countries in the world with an
elective HIV sentinel surveillance,
AIDS case surveillance
programme and reliable
epidemiological database on
AIDS. District capacity to
implement HIV prevention has
been realised through the
establishment 01 District
Inter-sectoral AIDS co-ordinating
Committees which bring together
representatives 01 Government
departments, NGOs and
Community Based Organisations.
The Ministry of Health has since
1995 decentralised AIDS
activities to the districts by issuing
authority to incur expenditure to
District Medical Officers lor AIDS
control.
c) SPA will recommend an
appropriate institutional
Framework lor effective
management and coordination
of HIV/AIDS programme activities.
b) It will enable the government to
play its leadership role in AIDS
prevention and control activities.
Challenges posed by AIDS call
for a multi-sectoral approach thus
bringing a diversity 01 actors
together. Their roles will be
harmonised within the framework
01 this SPA.

because issues related to sexuality are
taboo, private and intimate.
2.1 Economic Impact
AIDS has significant effects on
demographic composition 01the
population, and on social and economic
structures 01 the country. The disease has
negative effects on life expectancy, inlant
mortality, adult mortality, and dependency
ratios. At the micro level, AIDS brings
hardships to the family by reducing the
capacity to cam income. It adversely
affects health care expenditures as well as
the overall development 01 the country at
macro-economic level. Thus, AIDS has
adverse economic repercussions given its
negative impact on population trends,
labour productivity and overall social costs.
2.2. Morbidity and mortality
Most Kenyans with HIV infection look
healthy and have no symptoms. This is
due to the long incubation period of AIDS.
Because up to 80% 01 people infected are
in the age-group 15-49 years, effective
labour force lor the country is threatened.
The number 01 deaths arising from fix
blown AIDS remains a small proportion of
the HIV positive population but is growing
steadily. It is estimated that whereas
16,000 people died 01 the disease by 1989,
and 200,000 by 1995, the cumulative figure
is projected to increase to 1 million by the
year 2000.
The economic consequences of increasing
deaths particularly in the rural areas will be
the deprivation ol the agricultural sector
profits required labour force, noting that 74%
of Kenya's labour force is engaged in small
scale farming.
Increasing deaths due to AIDS results in
higher child and adult dependency ratios,
which imply greater demand for health and
education services. More single parents
especially mothers and AIDS orphans win
raise the demand for social selVices.
Because it is the duty 01 the Government to
provide these social services, the
implications of this will be the diversion 01
investment funds to meet the increased
demands for social services. In addition,
the country will have a restricted tax base
thus reducing the Government's ability to
meet the demand lor social services.
2.3 Costs to the economy
The direct and indirect costs ol treating
AIDS patients can be quantified. Direct
costs include the cost 01 drugs, laboratory
tests, radiology and hospital overhead
costs. Indirect costs involve the average
productive -years lost. Surveys’ in Kenya
indicate that a productive person can be
defined to be one aged between 15 and 65
years. An adult therefore has 50 years
available for work. On average, a Kenyan
is employed lor 36 years. Combining
productive life-years lost with the age 01
those who develop AIDS, each new AIDS
case results in a total loss 0122 years 01
productive life. The average direct cost per
new AIDS case IS estimated to be Kshs.
34.680 assuming that  55 per cent 01 AIDS
patients receive hospital treatment plus an
estimated Indirect cost of Kshs. 538,560 in
lost wages. This gives the combined cost
ol AIDS to be Kshs. 573,240 These costs
are very high lor a young economy like that
of Kenya.
In order lor the Government to meet the
costs of treating AIDS and related diseases
it must adopt a strategy of partnership with
the private sector, NGOs, donor agencies
and the community in health care
financing. Education programmes through
the clergy, politicians, provincial
administration and community leaders to
create awareness among Kenyans in order
to curb further spread of AIDS is a priority
2.4 Social and cultural challenges
Heterosexual relations are primarily
determined by psychological and
social-cultural factors. It IS important to
understand the dynamics underlying these
factors as they can facilitate and also
prevent HIV transmission. Sexual instinct is
triggered by both internal and external
influences. Psycho-sexual development
triggered by both internal and external
influences. Psycho-sexual development
and socialization 01 norms and values
within the family or community and the
inherent social organization are important
instruments in the regulation of sexual
behaviour. Control of sexual behaviour is
challenging because sex is a private
activity used by individuals and
communities to fulfil specific functions.
There is a fairly high degree 01 awareness
about AIDS among Kenyans. However,
this level of awareness has not been
matched by comparable behaviour change
mainly due to diverse social-cultural, and
personal factors which are inherent in
society and among people. Focus should
be made on specific cultural practices that
promote positive behaviour and discourage
negative practices. Efforts must be made
to promote socialcultural norms, values,
beliefs and enacted laws that centre
around marriage and procreation in order
to regulate heterosexual behaviour.
Consensus between religious teachings on
sexuality and the social-cultural practices
must be harmonized through education,
are expected to provide role models to'
enhance selective attachment with
individuals who have positive influence on
young people's psychosocial
development.
Peer influence plays a significant part in
determining the level 01 involvement In
risk practices. In a more traditional society
the group may have strong social beliefs
which are common to all members, and
this is reinforced through peer grouping.
Peer education lor groups with deviant
behaviour will be used to address
problems related to adult and adolescent
depression, social pressure, eariy sexual
exposure and experiences which may
lead to hi\)h risk behaviour like '
commercial sex, bisexuality and drug
abuse which in turn make an individual
vulnerable to HIV infection. The cultural
diversity that exists in Kenyan
communities negates uniformity in the'
application of mechanisms that would help
to regulate sexual behaviour.
Furthermore, the norms, values and
social-cultural identity are being eroded
by western influence. No new acceptable
social order has been created to replace
the old one. Therefore, community
counselling will be encouraged in order to
revisit customary law which guided
marriage, premarital and extramarital sex,
separation, divorce and remarriage as a
strategy to minimise e deviant sexual
behaviour.
2.5 Orphaned children
Orphans are a social burden. Those
infected have a double dilemma because
AIDS is a stigmatized disease. Social
attitude to orphans From single mothers is
even more negative because traditional
practice scorns such children thereby
denying them property rights. Advocacy
on the rights 01 such children will be
intensified. Communities will be
persuaded to take responsibility, as
practised in the traditional sense to care
and support these children including
those infected with HIV.
2.6 Cultural Issues
The diversity in social-cultural ideologies
constitute the diverse and peculiar
elements 01 sexual practices inherent in
Kenyan societies. Cultural beliefs anlj
practices were useful in maintaining
biological continuity, socialization 01
young people, maintaining 01 law and
order, defining the meaning of 
producing and distributing goods and
services.  These practices also provided
the capacity lor societies to cope with .
calamities such as draught and disease
outbreaks. With the advent 01 AIDS, $some
these beliefs and practices require
re-examination because they promote
behaviours which put individuals at risk 01
contracting or transmitting HIV. These$
include the different types 01
like polygamy. woman to woman
marriage. reunion. polyandrous,
hypodermic. leveret (widow Inherit;;.nee)
endogamous and exogamous
relationships. Non sexual cultural practices
and rites such as circumcision
piercing, ritual bathing ol the dead,
and tattooing, if done h
contaminated instruments could pose a
great danger to practitioners as well as to
their clients. Efforts will be made to
identify and document traditional norms.
beliefs and practices that may promote
HIV transmission,
Society will be made to understand the
relationship between these practice$ and
HIV transmission. Community involvement
hi identifying possible solutions will ~e
undertaken. Advocacy on virtues that
lessen the risk 01 Infection and promote
collective responsibility in the care 
rehabilitation of the infected and the
affected will be intensified taking into
account that changes in cultural practice
take a very long time because they 
deeply rooted in society The Government
recognizes the important role the
social-cultural factors play in transmission
and containment 01 HIV.
2.7 Legal and ethical challenges
The Government of Kenya has responded
to the problem 01 HIV and AIDS by
including a chapter on AIDS in the 7th
National Development Plan and the 5th
edition 01 District Development Plan and
has developed various manuals and
Policy Guidelines on the control and
management 01 HIV/AIDS. However, no
specific legal standards have been'
developed to address the problem.
Although there is no specific statute
dealing with AIDS In Kenya, 
existing statutes have provisions
which are ol direct relevance to the
management o AIDS epidemic. Otf.er
legal positions can be inferred 
expected customary law and cultural
practices. The issues emanating Ir(lm
these legal positions include
Human rights: All forms 01 discrimination
against people with AIDS will be outlawed
as enshrined in the Constitution. '

these legal positions include:
Testing from HIV: Testing lor HIV will be
voluntary with informed consent except
lor authorized research where the
protocol has been approved by the'
National AIDS Committee.
at risk of infection alter the individual
has been provided enough opportunity
to disclose his EW status to those
concerned.
Medical ethics: The existing ethical
practices will continue to be applicable
in the handling AIDS and HIV infection.
In the interest 01the public an people
diagnosed with HIV infection must be
informed ol their status and be
encouraged to take precaution for
themselves and those with whom they
are likely to get into sexual relations.
Employer-employee rights: The
employer does not have to know the
HIV status 01their employees without
the consent 01the employee.
Research: Co-ordination ol research is
currently being handled by different
departments of Government without
legal authority A legal body' with a .
clearly defined mandate Will be
established to co-ordinate
AIDS/HIV/STDs and related research.
Religion and culture: Because ol the
diversity of the Kenyan culture and
religion, written law and ethics will be
applied within the context 01 specific
communities. Research on these
issues will be undertaken to shed more
light on what is involved in each
community. Religious and cultural
practices and utterances which
undermine HIV/AIDS control measures
will be censured for public good.
Criminal sane/ions: Criminal sanctions
against people who deliberately and
irresponsibly infect others with MV will
be upheld.
Children affected by AIDS: Children
infected and affected by HIV/AIIDS will
be protected from exploitation and
discrimination using existing laws.
Insurance: The Government will work
closely with insurance companies to
establish guidelines pertaining to
policies and benefits for people affected
or infected with HIV.
Both medical and legal ethics provide a
basis lor the protection 
rights 01 persons affected by HIV/AIDS.
Provisions governing medical ethics in
Kenya are found in the codes of
professional conduct and discipline.
The major ethical concerns relate to
training, confidentiality,
professional judgement and the
guarantee 0 safety ol health care
providers.
2.8 Religion and culture
Kenya consists of many religious
communities, and each 01thern has
certain rules and norms, which form
part ol the regulating mechanisms in
socially ethnic community has its
traditional customs and laws. Some
communities have common cultural
practices and these practices have
implications for the spread of I-HV
These norms are relevant to the social
behaviour related to the transmission
and spread 01 HIV/AIDS . Most
religions have a stand on the issues of
premarital and extramarital sex,
abortion, contraceptives and polygamy
In keeping With their beliefs. These ln
turn have a bearing on the
management of the HIV/AIDS
epidemic. Many ol the legal and ethical
provisions, and religious and cultural
positions reveal various social
dilemmas which need careful thought
and serious attention in any attempt to
resolve them in the formulation of
policies and the management and
control of HIV/AiDS.
2.9 Health care
The rapid increase in the number of
reported cases of AIDS and people
with HIV Infection presents a significant
challenge to the existing health care
system The potential to over-stretch
existing resources lor health care
delivery exists.
Provision 01 health care remains a big
challenge to the Government.
Shortage 0 drugs and patient care
supplies, inadequate diagnostic
capabilities at various levels including
blood screening equipment and their
maintenance. overcrowding in the
health facilities, irregular supply 01
testing reagents, and high turnover of
qualified health personnel making
continuity impossible are indications 01
serious strain on the health sector. HIV
has caused a major resurgence 01
Tuberculosis which presents a major
public health problem particularly wit
the emergence 01 drug resistant I
01 Tubercle bacilli. The cost 01
treatment Is too high. Drugs for
treatment of HIV infection co
average 700,000 Kenya S
person per year. Drugs I
management of
are also very expensive.
