{"text": "Top of Form\nBottom of Form\nTuesday, September 24,\u00a02013\nMr President, is HIV on your national agenda?\n\u2028More by this Author \nDEAR SIR,\nI want to talk to you, not as an activist, but as a mother. First, congratulations for the 100-plus days in office. I can imagine how tough it must be to work for the entire country. I work with a community-based organisation that reaches about 60,000 households. It gives me sleepless nights, so I cannot fathom what you are up against. \nI was wondering if I could get a visit to State House. If only you found time in your super-busy schedule, I would share some things with you face to face without the media and the intimidating security detail. The issues I want to talk about concern the very life of this blessed nation. \nI am concerned, Mr President. I have not heard a single comment from you on HIV. Is it out of fear or you simply do not want to mention it? \nIt would be remarkable if in the meetings you go to, you say how you are championing the fight and struggle to defeat Aids and how you are helping orphans and vulnerable children, widows and grandmothers. It is hard to interpret what your silence on the matter means. \nAs a person living with HIV, at times I feel threatened in a very personal way. My life hangs on political will and financial support of other nations, other than my own country. Sir, does it worry anyone in your government that today if the (US) President\u2019s Emergency Plan for Aids Relief (PEPFAR) or the Global Fund withdrew funding to antiretroviral therapy (ART), my days would be numbered? \nWhat is more, my five boys, four of whom escaped HIV courtesy of antiretrovirals, would join the statistics of orphans in Kenya. This also applies to almost\u00a0half-a-million other people living with HIV and on ART. It applies to the nearly 800,000 others waiting to be put on treatment. What is your government doing about this? \nThere is the financial support for vulnerable groups every two or so months. However, this is not realistic, considering the challenges these citizens bear. I mean, a kilogramme of flour costs the same for everyone, irrespective of the level of income. I urge you to put your foot down and introduce an affordable package for these people, especially\u00a0children.\nThis will make them aware of your personal concern and commitment about their issues. \nSir, kindly advise the Ministry of Education that when they select top students to join national schools, there should be a slot\u00a0for such children. They may not perform as well as their counterparts because of antiretrovirals, which affect their brains. Regardless, they deserve a chance. \nI take antiretroviral drugs. At times I cannot remember what I read only a few seconds before. God knows how these children keep their memories active for tough exams. It is no wonder\u00a0that some perform poorly in school. Still, they are our children and we owe them justice and love. \nTo date, no single parliamentarian nor high office holder has publicly declared their HIV status. I am not insinuating anything. I know there is such a thing as stigma and denial in high places.\nI KNOW IT IS DIFFICULT\nThis virus does not respect anybody. Our leaders who are living with HIV need help, although they may not say it because they do not want to lose face with the electorate.\nI know this is difficult, Mr President, but I wish you could set up a parliamentary post-test club. For those who test HIV-positive, something needs to be done so that their positions do not become an impediment for them to tell publicly how they are living positively. \nYour father, Jomo Kenyatta, mentioned elimination of disease as one of this country\u2019s development priorities. He did not know about Aids. He would turn in his grave if you allowed his granddaughter, Ngina, to live in fear of contracting HIV. \nMr President, if today\u00a0my son, Peter,\u00a0met\u00a0and proposed to Ngina, and this could happen, I am sure you would want to know my son\u2019s HIV status.\nThis worry can be a thing of the past if your government makes smart and strategic investments towards ensuring universal access to Aids treatment services, zero new infections, zero Aids-related deaths, and zero stigma.\nI would not want my children and future generations to go through what I did. This is the reason I call for not only your personal attention, but also a policy commitment to this national cause. \u2028Finally, please tweet my twin boys, Baraka and Gabriel, happy five months.\nThis is the diary of Asunta Wagura, a mother-of-five who tested HIV-positive 26 years ago. She is the executive director of the Kenya Network of Women with Aids (KENWA). Email: asuntawagura@hotmail.com "}