{"text": "March 22,\u00a02011\nThey ate and drunk as the children watched \nBy ASUNTA WAGURA\nThe other day, I bumped into her on the streets of Nairobi after a long time. She is a retired secretary from one of the line ministries that our organisation partners with.\nShe was keen to know how we were faring in the ministry. I told her the truth, without thinking twice, because her former employer had declined to support us, like it had done in the past. \nI was surprised when she told me she wasn\u2019t surprised. Before she left, she had overheard some of the officers I liaised with discussing me in a negative manner.\nReason? I had refused to take KENWA children to an event a prominent person was holding. This prominent person wanted people to see how he/she is implementing good HIV-related work. I had not declined to participate in bad faith. I had good reasons. Just before this, I had a regrettable experience involving our organisation\u2019s children.\nThey had been invited to an international conference and as always, I was happy that my children (read KENWA children) had been invited to participate.\nHowever, my happiness was short-lived. The children stayed hungry the whole day after entertaining the guests whole-heartedly. No one gave them lunch, snacks or drinks, yet they were there the whole day. I was appalled. \nHow could adults plan for their meals and forget the children? I almost shed tears when I was told how the children hungrily watched the adults pile plates of food from the buffet table, yet they got nothing, not even a glass of water. \nAs if this was not bad enough, when it was time to go home, the hired matatus stayed put until the rush hour was over. This meant that the children arrived home at around 10 pm, and with unbearable hunger pangs. \nFrom then, I made it clear that before we could commit to any invite, we had to be assured that KENWA children and our social workers would be provided with lunch and transportation to ensure that they\u2019re back to their homes by six in the evening.\nWhen I received the invite in question, I told these officials our conditions. If they couldn\u2019t fulfil them, then the children would not attend the function. Unfortunately, they interpreted this as arrogance.\nAs I walked away, I could not help wondering how such crucial help could be withdrawn just because I had asked for a simple lunch for the children. Obviously, it seems as though as long as they perform, the children can go hungry for all they care. \nI feel bad when adults don\u2019t put into consideration the feelings of children. Imagine the trauma these children went through, waiting for a plate of food that never arrived. \nIt\u2019s for this very reason that I ensure that during our in-house events, children are served first. Adults can wait. \nAs a child, my friends and I would gatecrash weddings so that we could have a glimpse of, and hopefully, get a bite of the yummy-looking cake. When we failed to get a piece of cake, thanks to adults who would bypass us because we were dirty and obviously from the nearby village, we would go home heartbroken. \nChildren should be treated like the human beings they are and whatever else you deny them, please don\u2019t withhold food.\nThis is the diary of Asunta Wagura, a mother of three who tested HIV-positive 24 years ago. She is the executive director of the Kenya Network of Women with Aids (KENWA).\nasuntawagura@hotmail.com"}