{"text": "HY COURT BLOCKED BID TO DECLARE PART OF HIV AND AIDS LAW \nBY MONICA ACHODE\nEarly this month the High Court declined to suspend the implementation of section 24 of the HIV Aids HIV and AIDS Prevention and Control Act (the Act) citing that public interest outweighed the applicant\u2019s interests at the interim stage of the hearing.\u00a0 The court proceeded to direct that an early hearing date for the petition be set so that the issues raised could be comprehensively dealt with by a three judge bench. Section 24 spells out penal consequences to anyone who knowingly and recklessly places another person at risk of becoming infected with HIV. The section provides that if found guilty, the convicted person shall be liable to a fine not exceeding five hundred thousand shillings or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding seven years. The contested section came into operation on December 1 2010 through Legal Notice 180 of 2010 issued by the Minister for Special Programs. \u2028\u2028Following an interim application by the applicant, Aids Law Project, seeking to suspend the enforcement of section 24 pending hearing and of the substantive petition the court balanced two possible outcomes. One hand the court considered the risk of issuing orders to suspend a section of a statute, in the event that upon hearing of the petition the interlocutory orders were not confirmed, the effects of the earlier order would be irreversible.\u00a0 On the other hand, if the conservatory orders were not granted and at the conclusion of the hearing the orders sought in the petition were granted, the applicant would suffered irreparable loss in the interim period. \u2028\u2028Mr. Justice Daniel Musinga presiding over interim application stated that the court had to proceed with great caution before granting conservatory orders which would have the effect of halting enforcement of an existing law.\u00a0 \u00a0\u201cThis was because there was presumption that in debating a bill and eventually enacting the same into law, the legislature considered all the relevant factors. \u201c Justice Musinga ruled. \u2028\u00a0In the substantive petition Aids Law Project, is seeking the court for the aforesaid the section to be declared unconstitutional. Further that the petition is seeking for a declaration that section 24 is very wide and vague and is therefore discriminatory as against people with HIV/AIDS. \u2028\u2028Pending determination of the substantive petition, the applicant sought an injunction against the Attorney General and the Director of Public Prosecutions (the respondents) from enforcing section 24 of the Act as related to penal provisions therein. The application was based on several grounds among them; that the provisions of the section 24 of the Act were worded in a vague and overbroad manner incapable of giving the ordinary citizen sufficient notice of the criminalized act or omission and the intended objective it was meant to achieve; that the section failed to adhere to the principles of legality that. The applicant submitted that the law had to be precise, clear and capable of giving sufficient notice to the ordinary citizen of what was the forbidden act or omission. Thus section 14 was unconstitutional because it failed to conform to the fact that every person had the right to have any dispute that could be resolved by the application of law decided in a fair and public hearing before a court, and that the its wording put the liberty of persons infected or carrying the HIV and AIDS virus in jeopardy- \u00a0in the sense that the said liberty could be deprived arbitrarily without just cause and on the basis of a vague and imprecise law lacking in due notice.\u2028\u2028In its affidavit the applicant swore that an offence could arise, under section 24(1) as read with section 24(3) of the Act, from a failure to disclose information to a \u201csexual contact\u201d. According to the applicant this meant that there was a risk to the realization of the rights to a fair hearing under section 50 of the Constitution of the Republic of Kenya. The affidavit further deponed that the law did not define what \u201cany sexual contact\u201d was, nor did it place any corresponding duty of confidentiality on the \u201csexual contact\u201d or say what \u201cin advance\u201d meant.\u2028\u2028The applicant through its advocate, Mr. Omwanza, further deponed that no transmission or intent was required; making it extremely difficult for the average person to determine precisely what behaviour was subject to prosecution. The concept of sexual contact was of a very broad scope that was extremely difficult to define, and its definition would be dependent upon the subjective views of the particular judicial officer trying the case. The applicant further stated that criminalization of HIV transmission was ineffective at preventing transmission and was also unconstitutional.\u2028\u2028On the unconstitutionality of sections 24(1) and \u00a024(3) of the Act, the applicant told the court that section 24 discriminated against people living with HIV, women and members of vulnerable groups. He pointed out that Article 31 of the Constitution provided that every person had the right to privacy which included the right not to have information relating to one\u2019s family or private affairs unnecessarily required or revealed or the privacy of their communications infringed. \u2028\u2028Regarding criminalization of HIV transmission, the applicant submitted that there were other applicable laws such as the \u00a0the Sexual Offences Act that prohibited willful infection of HIV. He cited Section 26 of the Sexual Offences Act which provided that any person, having actual knowledge that he/she was infected with HIV or any other life threatening disease and who sexually transmitted the disease intentionally knowingly and willfully was guilty of an offence and was liable to imprisonment for a term of not less than 15 years but which sentence could be imprisonment for life.\u00a0 \u2028\u2028It was argued therefore that in view of the unconstitutionality of Section 24 of the HIV and AIDS Prevention and Control Act and in view of the fact that there was already in existence other provisions of the law dealing with deliberate and willful transmission of HIV, the orders sought in the application ought to be granted pending hearing and determination of the petition.\u00a0 \u2028\u2028In opposing the application Mr. Onyiso for the respondent stated that the applicant had not set out a prima facie case with a probability of success. In his view sections 24 and 22 of the HIV and AIDS Prevention and Control Act were not vague or ambiguous and that the rules of statutory interpretation militated against the grant of orders sought. He urged the court not lose sight of the good intentions of the Act in particular section 24. He reminded the court that that the applicant had not demonstrated the irreparable damage that HIV/AIDS infected persons would suffer if conservatory orders were not granted as sought.\u00a0 \u2028\u2028The court weighed the competing interests of the applicant and the persons they represented against those of the wider public, and held that the latter had to prevail.\u00a0 The court declines to grant the orders sought by the applicant instead proceeding to direct that an early hearing date for the petition be set so that the issues raised could be comprehensively dealt with. In reaching its decision the court stated that under Article 165 (4) of the Constitution of Kenya, 2010, any matter certified by court as raising a substantial question of law had to be heard by at least three judges assigned by the Chief Justice. The Court further added that in an application of this nature the court had to endeavour to uphold and protect the rights of the applicant as guaranteed by the Constitution keeping in mind that on the other hand, the enjoyment of those rights had to be within the confines of the law."}