{"text": "We can all afford hope \n \u201cHIV cure found.\u201d \nTwenty or so years ago, this was news that would have made people living with HIV to sell all their belongings and move to where this cure had been found. \nA cure would have meant everything to us. It would have cured us from the killer doses of stigma and discrimination. It would have cured us from the cloud of fear that most of us walked in. \nI still remember and, in retrospect, laugh at how naive I was to grab at any floating piece of straw that represented hope.\nI was like a drowning woman, who reached out for anything, even a crocodile\u2019s back. Most of my thoughts and dreams were centred on finding a cure, because I knew it was the only thing that would make my life \u2018normal\u2019. \nAnd then, with time, I came to realise that I was normal; that this virus had messed up my mind until I saw myself as a pariah.\nIt had eroded my self-worth, until I believed that the only thing that would make me human again was a cure to rid my body of the virus.\nI was normal just the way I was: only my immunity had been compromised. All these memories came flooding back when I heard the news about the \u201cBerlin Patient\u201d, the man who turned HIV-negative, after going through a rare stem cell transplant treatment to fight myeloid leukaemia, a cancer of the immune system. \nThis turn out has given people living with HIV, especially us, the long-term survivors who have buried countless peers, hope that we will live to see a cure or vaccine that prevents the transmission of HIV. In the meantime, what do we do? \nThe cold harsh fact is that even right now, antiretroviral drugs are beyond the reach of most people. Initially, only the rich were able to access these life-prolonging medications, and the rest had to make do with, well, God\u2019s grace. \nI know of some people who got started on drugs then, when their money ran out, they had to stop, and then got started on a different line of drugs when they got the money.\nThey got started on the different line because non-adherence to these drugs comes with life-threatening complications. \nAgain, what do I do? I go on living, that\u2019s what I will do, because, as much as I would want to get cured, this virus has taught me that, if I lose my head and run after anything that promises to cure me, then I run the risk of being a permanent resident of Heartbreak Hotel. \nNo. I am not making a beeline for the cure. I am living with the hope that when the researchers get a cure, it will not sell like a piece of real estate in Mars. \nRight now, I will make do with what God has provided me with, and what has kept me going this far: hope. \nHope is a good thing, especially the hope to see tomorrow, with what God provides, what\u2019s available: antiretroviral drugs and a support group.\nIf we all go the way of the Berlin Patient, and drop everything that has kept us alive, then it means that only the moneyed in society will get the cured. \nI always tell people that HIV is one of life\u2019s greatest equalisers: it strikes both the haves and the have-nots. \nThe irony of it is that, for instance, I have seen women with limited education living in resource-scarce settings living positively, while some educated women holding down good jobs living and dying in denial. \nSo, I am afraid of a scenario where a cure will be sold to the highest bidder. This will, in one fell swoop, kill the dream that we have fought for to have universal access to care and support. \nIt is not like the Loliondo cure where the rich and poor get the same dose, at the same cost. The only thing that one needs is the patience to stand in the snaking queue. \nAlthough some of us have been cautious about the news of this Berlin Patient, it has taught me that, truly, God works in mysterious ways. \nThe Berlin Patient is gay. I don\u2019t know about you, but I think God is trying to tell us that He can use anyone, when He wants. \nThis is the diary of Asunta Wagura, a mother of three who tested HIV-positive 24 years ago. She is the executive director of the Kenya Network of Women with Aids (KENWA).\u2028asuntawagura@hotmail.com"}