{"text": "Love Begins With The Woman Reflected In The Mirror\nBY ASUNTA WAGURA\nI always tell people that my first business is to stay alive. In my line of work, it is extremely easy to carry other people's crosses and put your own issues on the backburner.\nWhen I studied counselling, my tutors told us that we should always try not to get emotionally involved in what our clients were going through.\nThis is easier said than done because we are dealing with human beings, not some inanimate objects that one can handle without empathy or even - (and this is greatly frowned upon) - pity.\nMost times, I have been moved by the plight of orphans and vulnerable children, so much, that I have gone to great lengths to make sure that I lessen their suffering.\nThere were times when my house resembled a paediatric ward; children would be \"admitted\" and \"discharged\" intermittently, and I would make sure that if they were under my roof, they received unparalleled care and support. At such times, I forgot about my tutors' teaching of not crossing certain lines with my clients.\nStill, that does not mean that I should take lesser care of myself. It reminds me of what one of my mentors, Mary Fisher once said; something to the effect that her children don't need her as a patient in bed, rather, as a mother who's taking care of business.\nSo, even when I'm sharing my time with other people, I always remember that my tank of energy and life also needs to be full, because I cannot do anything for anyone if I'm running on empty.\nI guess it is even harder for our community health workers, most of whom are HIV-positive, to take care of people living with HIV. It's easy to be torn between caring for themselves or their clients.\nAt times, we put high premiums on the lives and welfares of clients, that we forget our caregivers are also human beings living with HIV. They are not pre-programmed robots.\nHowever, the long and short of it is that every person living with HIV must learn to take care of his or her business, as selfish as that may sound. The Bible tells us to love our neighbours as we love ourselves.\nFor me, this automatically means that love begins with the woman in the mirror. Even if I am to be my sister's or a vulnerable child's caregiver, for instance, it does not make me a better caregiver if I neglect myself and my health, but nurse the bedridden, who are a breath away from death, back to life.\nI don't know about other women, but one of the first things that HIV did was mess up my self-esteem. It eroded my dignity so much, that I thought I was a lesser being. I was fearful - because those were dark days and stigma and discrimination was institutionalised, or so it seemed - and I had the wrong attitude. I was not taking care of myself, of my business; but taking care not to step on the toes of these other \"normal\" beings.\nI thought this was a price I had to pay for being HIV positive. Unknown to me, I was stigmatising myself and victimising myself and, even without wearing a T-shirt with the words, \"STEP ON ME\"; giving anyone with feet the opportunity to use me as a doormat.\nI was a walking doormat, and all I thought I could do best was to take care of other people's soiled businesses.\nIt is this attitude, and fears and inadequacies that Marianne Williamson talks about: \"Our deepest fear is not that we are inadequate. Our deepest fear is that we are powerful beyond measure. It is our light, not our darkness, that most frightens us. We ask ourselves, who am I to be brilliant, gorgeous, talented, fabulous? Actually, who are you not to be? You are a child of God. Your playing small does not serve the world. There is nothing enlightened about shrinking so that other people won't feel insecure around you. We are all meant to shine, as children do. We were born to make manifest the glory of God that is within us. It's not just in some of us; it's in everyone. And as we let our own light shine, we unconsciously give other people permission to do the same. As we are liberated from our own fear, our presence automatically liberates others.\"\n\u00a0"}