{"text": "December 18,\u00a02011\nChallenge to develop Low-cost devices to diagnose diseases in developing countries unveiled\nBy JAMES RATEMO, jratemo@ke.nationmedia.com\nFight against disease in third world countries has gone a notch higher.\nGrand Challenges Canada and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation have teamed up on an unprecedented global effort to discover and develop affordable, easy-to-use tools to help developing country health workers rapidly diagnose diseases in rural communities.\nThe ultimate innovation would lead to a timely and appropriate treatment of illnesses in poor countries, potentially saving countless lives.\n\u201cImagine a hand-held, battery-powered device that can take a drop of blood and, within minutes, tell a healthcare worker in a remote village whether a feverish child has malaria, dengue or a bacterial infection,\u201d says Peter A. Singer, MD, Chief Executive Officer of Grand Challenges Canada. \u201cMore rapid diagnosis of malaria alone could prevent 100,000 deaths a year. We believe this and other life-saving opportunities are within our reach.\u201d\nThe five research areas of this Grand Challenge break the diagnostic problem down into its component parts: Draw blood (or other biological sample) and prep it for analysis, analyze the sample to identify disease, develop the technologies to obtain and transmit data and receive back results, and ensure the device will work in the field where there is often no electricity or refrigeration. \n\"The project is analogous to software developers creating new apps for smart phones and tablet computers,\u201d says Rebecca Lackman, Grand Challenges Canada Program Officer for Diagnostics. \n\u201cResearchers have accepted the challenge to create novel sampling and testing systems that can be plugged into a standardized analyzer that can test for malaria, tuberculosis, HIV and a variety of tropical diseases. The \u2018Integrated Innovation\u2019 approach means they will also investigate the social and business innovations needed for successful product delivery and use.\u201d\n\u201cThis initiative is unique in many respects: it will allow health workers to identify multiple diseases and pathogens from one patient specimen; plug-and-play platforms will allow best-in-class components to be developed and integrated in a diagnostic device; and we are creating a common application platform; thereby, reducing both commercialization costs and regulatory issues, making it more attractive for industry to invest in diagnostics for global health.\u201d\nOne grantee, Bigtec Labs in Bangalore, India, has already developed a handheld analyser called a mini-PCR (Polymerase Chain Reaction) machine capable of identifying malaria from its DNA fingerprint. \n\u201cA colleague here one day was ill with what he thought was food poisoning,\" said B. Chandrasekhar Nair, Director of Bigtec Labs. \"We ran a blood sample through our mini-PCR and it turned out to be malaria.\u201d Immediately treated, the colleague returned to health within a week. \u2028With its CAD $1.3 million grant, Bigtec will use nano-materials to develop a sophisticated filter to concentrate pathogen DNA from samples of blood, sputum, urine, or nasal and throat swabs. Once concentrated, the DNA can be processed and illnesses identified in the mini-PCR.\nOther innovative point-of-care diagnostic tools such as a piece of woven fabric which can test blood or urine for disease and a simple, easy to use test for diagnosing diarrheal disease -- the biggest killer of developing world children under the age of 5 -- are also among the projects receiving funding.\n\u201cSafe, effective methods of diagnosing illness at the point-of-care are vital to improving health in developing countries,\u201d said Chris Wilson, Director of Global Health Discovery at the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. \u201cWe hope these innovative ideas lead to technologies that allow patients to get the right treatment quickly\u2014speeding recovery, limiting the spread of disease and helping them to lead healthy, productive lives.\u201d \nThe innovative projects receiving funding include: \n\u2022Dr. Dhananjaya Dendukuri from Achira Labs in Bangalore India, and Dr. Nandini Dendukuri from McGill University in Montreal are developing a piece of silk that can be used as a cost-effective and simple diagnostic for blood and urine samples. Called Fabchips (Fabric Chips) the woven diagnostic has the added benefit of providing jobs to local artisans and being environmentally friendly.\n\u2022Dr. David Goldfarb, a Canadian working in Botswana, is testing a simple, rapid, easy-to-use cotton swab for the detection of diarrheal disease in the developing world.\n\u2022Dr. Wendy Stevens from the University of Witwatersrand in South Africa is testing new point-of-care technologies for the integrated management of HIV and TB treatment to encourage equity, affordability and accessibility to treatment.\n\u2022Dr. Patricia Garcia at the Universidad Peruana Cayetano Heredia in Peru will look at ways to overcome social and commercial barriers to delivering point-of-care diagnostic tests aimed at improving maternal and child health \u2013 two of the UN\u2019s Millennium Development goals for 2015."}