DAILY NATION WEDNESDAY APRIL 15, 2009

CHOLERA IS BACK ON THE SCENE

Cholera is an old disease that is once
again making the news, this time in
the western and northern parts of
the country. It is an acute infection of the
gut characterised by profuse diarrhoea
and vomiting that lead to dehydration,
body salt disturbances, leg cramps and
shock. Without treatment, death can
occur within hours.
Cholera is spread through
consumption of contaminated waterand
food. Cholera outbreaks are linked
to multiple sources such as drinking
river and lake water, living in crowded
conditions, eating at funeral or wedding
feasts, and consuming food or beverages
from street vendors. The cholera germ
can survive refrigeration and freezing, so
an infectious strain could travel far from
its original location in food. The common
housefly has also been implicated in
outbreaks, hence the importance of
hygiene at home.
After an incubation period of between
18 hours and five days, symptoms appear
abruptly and include watery diarrhoea
and vomit. The most distinctive feature
of cholera is the painless purging of
stool that resembles rice-water and has
sometimes been described as having
a fishy odour. Following a severe loss
of water from the body, symptoms of
severe dehydration include poor skin
turgidity, sunken eyes, wrinkled hands
and feet, restlessness and extreme thirst.
Under-nourished infants, particularly
those suffering from deficiencies of
zinc and vitamin A, appear to be more
susceptible to death from cholera. In
addition, susceptibility or severity is
worsened by the presence of other
diseases such as malaria or HIV and Aids.
The highest cholera attack rates are
usually in children aged between two
and four years; however, the illness is
generally first seen in adults owing to
exposure to contaminated food and
water. For unknown reasons, people of
blood group O are at much higher risk
of severe cholera infection. Miscarriage
or premature delivery can occur in
pregnant women as a complication of
shock and poor entry of nutrients to the
placenta following a cholera attack.
Prevention includes ensuring a safe
water supply, improving sanitation and
making food safe for consumption by
thorough cooking of food. Without
treatment, the fatality rate for cholera
is significant. However, treatment is
very effective and simple, based on the
concept of replacing fluids as fast as
they are being lost. Access to medication
(antibiotics) can halve the duration of
illness and lessen the diarrhoea to help
reduce secondary transmission.
Dr Kamau Kinyenje
pointofcare@africaonline.co.ke