Daily Nation/ December 1, 2004

WHAT BECAME OF THE AIDS BILL?

NO ONE SEEM INTERESTED IN PUSHING IT ANY FURTHER AND ITS IN DANGER OF DYING

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 1
address legal matters concerning HIV/Aids with
other workers and people living with the scourge,
regard to marriage, research, insurance and drug
access matters and make recommendations.
The Task Force also reviewed offences under the
Penal Code and other offences in the'laws of Kenya
in light of the HIV/Aids pandemic and made rec-

ommendations on how the penal laws could be
strengthened.
On August 6, 2004, the Bill was gazetted. And
that was the last we heard of it. No one seems
interested in pushing it any further and it now
appears to be in danger of dying. "When a bill is
tabled in Parliament, it follows a calendar. If the
person under whose jurisdiction a bill falls does not


push for it, that bill might never see the light of
day," says an official in the AG's chambers. In the
case of the mY/Aids Hill, the mandate to push it
Fellunder the Ministry of Health.

Safe practices

The Bill addresses many issues that are important
to the survival and rights of people living with HIV/

Aids (PLWHA) as well as those not infected. Some

of these issues include ensuring safe practices - for

instance, someone offering to donate any tissue will

undergo HIV testing, while any blood donated

must be tested for the virus. Also included are

guidelines to be followed in medical institutions to
ensure no infections occur in the line of duty.

One of the most important parts of the Bill
and which has become contentious among
many interested parties is Part IV 13(1,2),
which deals with testing, screening and access
to healthcare services. "No person shall com-
pel another to undergo an liIV test as a pre-
condition to or continued enjoyment of
employment, marriage, admission into 'any
educational institution, entry into or travel out
of the country or provision of healthcare, insur-
ance cover or any other service." Section 14(1)
subject to sub-section (2) of 13 says a child will not
undergo a test unless a guardian or parent allows it.
Another contentious section says that the results
of an HIV test will remain confidential except in
cases of a child or one with a disability that renders
them incapable of understanding the results.

Available resources
Section (2) mandates the Government to the maxi-


mum of its available resources to take the steps,
necessary to ensure access to essential,

to essential services, including access to
health care medicines at affordable

prices by persons with HIV or.

Aids and those exposed to the

risk (such as rape victims).

Section 20 emphasises the

confidentiality of one taking a

test - using codes for the I

whole process and ensuring no

transmission of this informa-

tion to any other person other

than the tested person or the
other people mentioned. Part

IV has become a very con-

tentious one with PLWHA's.
It states that a person who is

aware of his HIV-positive
I
status and knowingly
f,
infects others will be pros-

ecuted.                        i

Part VIII discusses dis-

criminatory acts and poli-

cies that include insurance

covers. An insurance
organisation should devise
a reasonable limit of cover An artist with flames 
burning on his hat show how Aids consumes people like ,fir
for which a proposer shall not be required to dis-
close his or her HIV status but if one exceeds that
limit, they will be compelled to a HIV test.

No person shall undertake HIV or Aids-related
biomedical research on another person or on any
tissue or blood removed from such person unless
such a research conforms to the requirements
under the Science and Technology Act or any other
written law for the ti e in force.
So why has the Bi not gone anywhere? "Very
many factors and for s that do not want to see it
go through for their own selfish reasons," says
Amollo, a joint secretary of the Task Force.
While the Bill is supposed to accommodate many
been accused of playing a role in inciting PLWHA 's
factors surrounding people with HIV, including
research rights, some foreign organisations have

for their own gains. According to Amollo, "Unless
the Bill is tabled in Parliament soon, it might die."
He expresses concern about the foreign organisa-
tions. "All organisations that work with PLWHA

contributed to the Task Force. But they did not
raise the issues they are raising now. Who are the
sufferers at the end of the day? People with HIV/

Aids, not those who are HIV-negative."
Amollo also feels that it will be important for
amendments to be made to the Bill after it is passed
so it can address prisoners' problems, Aids orphans
and the Succession Act, and traditional practices

that hinder the fight against HIV/Aids.
Muma also sees insurance companies playing a

role in blocking the Bill. "Insurance companies all

over the world and some right here in Kenya are

adjusting to the fact that the scourge is affecting

millions of their potential customers. They know

that there is no way they will survive if they do not

insure people with HIV. Th~ issue of insurance also
affects mortgages and the like. Who says that peo-

ple with HIV cannot payoff their loans?" she says.

Life insurance
Last May, the Association of Kenya Insurers (AKI)
threatened that life insurance premiums would
increase if the proposed Bill went through. The
AKI executive director was quoted saying, "The
Association strongly submits that if these legislative
changes are adopted, insurance will be rendered
inaccessible to the majority of Kenyans, whilst deal-
ing a major blow to the goal of mobilising long-
term savings through life insurance."
Dr Sobbie Mulindi, a lecturer at the University of
Nairobi who has been involved with HIV/Aids
work in Kenya for a long time, says that the issue of
the 2001 Abuja Declaration, where heads of states
signed a pact saying that the health budgets of their
respective countries must not be less than 15 per
cent of the total budgets, has been a bone of con-

tention for many countries. Kenya was a signa-


tory to the declaration. "Adhering to
this declaration means that HIV/

Aids issues are catered for and

must be taken seriously," he says.



Arbitrary studies

Dr Mulindi also regards the

contentious research part of

the Bill as "control and manip-

ulation" global process by

donor countries.       "These

organisations know that if this

Bill goes through, they won't

be able to carry out arbitrary
studies on Kenyans like they

are doing now."


The writer is a Harvard

University     Millennium

Human      Rights Fellow

researching on employ-

ment discrimination      of

people with J-/IV/Aids at

the Kenya       Human

Rights Commission.

