Daily Nation August 11,2004

SPREADING THE VIRUS - DELIBERATELY

After she learnt about re-infection, she says, she
has changed her behaviour radically. "I'm no
longer interested in lovers and ignore those who
come looking for me. I have also stopped drinking.
In fact, my body is reacting to alcohol. Every time I
drink, I sweat, vomit and eventually get a sore
throat. "
Then, she laughs.
Wesonga's story
Wamukoya Wesonga is seething with rage. His eldest
daughter was intentionally infected with Aids
last January by a man who knew he was dying.
The 16-year-old was fatally attracted to a man
from the city: he was a man with style and class, so
different from the common villagers. But the nine
days she spent with him have left her with a lifelong
disease and regrets. "
The man, now deceased, had come home to Kanjele
village to die when on the advice of his Nairobi
doctor. But his relatives didn't want him to die
without a wife to perform the final rites upon his
death, so they got him Wesonga's daughter.
Wesonga was disturbed when news about the
man's lifestyle in Nairobi reached him. He was told
that the man's Ugandan wife had died of Aids, and
that he, too, was ailing.
"In February, I asked'my father to go and find
out about my daughter's new home, which is not far
from here, as I was travelling to Eldoret, where I
work as a mason. But my father was treated badly
by the people there. They denied knowledge of my
daughter's presence in the home," says the father of
six bitterly.
When he returned home briefly in April, Wesonga,
accompanied by two friends, visited the home.
His son-in-law was ill and lying on a mat in his
mother's house, and Wesonga's daughter was taking
care of him.
The man's parents told Wesonga that their son
was just suffering from diarrhoea, which they attributed
to the village food, which was different from
what he was used to in the city.
But the sight of the man and his daughter beside
him hurt Wesonga so much that he went straight to
a local organisation - Rural Education and Economic
Programme (REEP) - for help. When he
eXplained his predicament to them, they immediately
went and rescued his daughter from the home.
He appeals to the Government to take serious
steps and punish those who infect others deliberately
because they "don't want to die alone."
"These people should be arrested and prosecuted.
This will serve as a warning to others. Once the
Government criminalises malicious spread of Aids
and arrests the culprits, this behaviour will be
curbed."
Those willingly spreading the disease are ignorant,
says Wesonga. In fact, they put themselves at
risk of re-infection.
Alice's* story
She sniffs and wipes her eyes with the back of her
hand. It has been four years since heR
brother-in-law defiled her and infected her with
HIV when she was only 11, but the memory of the
incident is still as raw as if it happened yesterday.
It was a Sunday morning and her sister had gone
to church, leaving her behind to do household
chores at their Kabras home. Her brother-in-law,
who had also stayed at home because he was
unwell, pounced on the little girl as she swept the
. kitchen, tore her clothes and defiled her.
"When he was through he laughed and said, 'My
mother will bury me but yours will bury you and
your sister. And if you tell anyone I will slaughter
you.' I wanted to die there and then before my sister
came from church. It was the most horrible
moment of my life."
When her sister came back, she found the young
girl sulking, her chores unfinished. "I want to go
home now," was all she said. She would not eat or
do anything else.
That was in June 2000. The young girl's sister had
withdrawn her from Standard Four in Butula only
six months earlier and taken her to Kabras to work
for her as a househelp since she herself was sickly.
The day after the incident, the two sisters set off for
their Butula home. It was only il) the safety of
home that the young girl told her sister what had
happened.
"My sister was shocked but she didn't say anything.
Soon afterwards, she died of Aids, and was
followed by her husband. Now I take care of one of
their two sons, who is eight," she says softly.
A year after her ordeal, she tested HIY-positive.
An aunt took her for testing after she fell ill and
seemed incurable. The nurse at the Voluntary
Councelling and Testing centre gave her medicine
for her dry cough. Apart from her aunt, who took
her for the test, nobody else knows about her status.
It is a well-guarded secret, not known to her
teachers, friends or siblings. She would die if they
got to know, she says. Her mother, who died last
year, did not know. She lost her father when she
was five.' ~
She pushes her illness to the back of her mind ~
and, although her sister disrupted her education, the girl, now 15 and in Standard Six, is determined
to study hard and become a paediatrician.
Ndubi's story
After passing her Kenya Certificate of Primary
Education examination, Janet Okinyi Ndubi was all
ready to go to Form One. But her father told her
that he would not pay fees for her because she was
likely to get pregnant and drop out of school, like
her sister had done earlier. She decided to stay put
and wait for her brother, who proceeded to secondary
school, to finish. She wanted to show her father
that she had neither pregnancy nor marriage on her
mind.
A year after her brother did his Kenya Secondary
Certificate of Education, Ndubi went to visit an
aunt, who was married in Butula. After a short
while, her aunt introduced her to a widower, whom
she recommended highly to Ndubi.
With no hope of getting a job, marriage appeared
the next best option. "I liked him and soon, I
moved in with him."
Ndubi took her new role as wife and stepmother
to the man's three children. She got three children
of her own but when she went for antenatal tests
during her last pregnancy in 1999, she tested HIVpositive
..
"I was devastated. I went to my aunt and asked
her why she had introduced me to a man whose
wife had died of Aids and who was obviously
infected. My aunt assured me she didn't know he.&oil
was infected, so I confronted my husband an(l"""l""asked him to be tested. He, too, was positive."
Her husband worked as a cook for missionaries
and left Ndubi at home with the children. What
hurts her is the fact that he deliberately infected her
CONTINUED ON PAGE 8


TRADITION AND GOOD SENSE IN CONFLICT


CONTINUED FROM PAGE 1
sure I am not infected," says Grace Adhiambo,
whose husband, Ochanda, returned home
recently after six years in remand.
She says she doesn't want to infect him
because, while Ochanda was in custody, she married
another man but he died a few months later
after falling sick. She suspects he might have died
of Aids.
"She was categorical that we use protection
even after we went for an HIV test and we both
tested negative," says Ochanda. "We are hopeful
that we will still tcst neagative when we go for a
follow-up tcst."
Near Bumula, ahout five kilometers from
Butula on the Kisumu Busia road, a man narrowly
escaped infection when his first wife intervened
hefore he could travel to Eldoret, where he
works. He was going there with his third wife.
who had just returned from llganda after nearly
10 years of separation.
"Not until hoth l1fyou go for an HIV test," his
first wife stubbornly said.
"No prohlem:' the man said confidently. As he
pedalled to the vel' centre in Butula, with his
youngest wife at the hack of the hicycle. the man
would occasionally use the woman's leso to wipe
his hrow.
When they were told their results. the man did
not want to sit anywhere near his wife, "I used
her leso to wipe myself, do you think I will he
infected?" he asked anxiously.
Unknown to him, his wife had married another
man during their separation and even had two
"These people should be arrested and prosecuted.
This will serve as a warning to others. Once the
Government criminalises malicious spread of Aids
and arrests the culprits, this behaviour will be
curbed."
Those willingly spreading the disease are ignorant,
says Wesonga. In fact, they put themselves at
risk of re-infection.
Alice's* story
She sniffs and wipes her eyes with the back of her
hand. It has been four years since her
children, both of whom had died.
They left the vel' separately, with the man
warning his wife that he did not want to see her at
his home again. But his first wife promised to take
care of her, saying it was up to her co-wife to
decide whether she wanted to stay or go away.
Despite this high level of understanding of
HIV/Aids, Butula is also a land of contrasts, and
harmful'traditions that fire the spread of the disease
are passionately upheld. Wife inheritance is
a practice that is close to the people's hearts and
yet it is one of the modes of infection. A widow
must be inherited ito "cleanse" her after the
death of her hushand.
Those who refuse to be inherited become outcasts
and will watch helplessly as their houses fall
to ruins since no man will risk repairing it for her
lest he be cursed.
Besides, there arc those widowed very
young, like 21-year-old Christine Awori,
who married at 1(i and was widowed at IS.
Early this year, she got herself a hoyfriend. a
teacher at a local school. When her parents found
out, they approached the teacher and asked him
whether he knew that their daughter was infected.
"He thought my parents werc lying and when I
confirmed to him that I had actually tested positive,
he still refused to believe m,' and accompanied
me to the YCT. When the counsellor told
him ahout my status, he gave me Sh90 for fare
and that was the last time I saw him."
Then there are those derailing the fight against
the pandemic, including widows with a lot of
money. They entice young men and since they are
the ones holding the purse strings, they set the
rules in the affair.
Jane Ndubi, left, was infected by her hus·
band. Above, a bitter Wamukoya Wesonga,
whose daughter was knowingly infected by
the man she married.
brother-in-law defiled her and infected her with
HIV when she was only 11, but the memory of the
incident is still as raw as if it happened yesterday.
It was a Sunday morning and her sister had gone
to church, leaving her behind to do household
chores at their Kabras home. Her brother-in-law,
who had also stayed at home because he was
unwell, pounced on the little girl as she swept the
. kitchen, tore her clothes and defiled her.
"When he was through he laughed and said, 'My
mother will bury me but yours will bury you and
your sister. And if you tell anyone I will slaughter
you.' I wanted to die there and then before my sister
came from church. It was the most horrible
moment of my life."
When her sister came back, she found the young
girl sulking, her chores unfinished. "I want to go
home now," was all she said. She would not eat or
do anything else.
That was in June 2000. The young girl's sister had
withdrawn her from Standard Four in Butula only
six months earlier and taken her to Kabras to work
for her as a househelp since she herself was sickly.
The day after the incident, the two sisters set off for
their Butula home. It was only il) the safety of
home that the young girl told her sister what had
happened.
"My sister was shocked but she didn't say anything.
Soon afterwards, she died of Aids, and was
followed by her husband. Now I take care of one of
Malicious spread of Aids is a serious problem
here. Some of the infected say they don't want to
die alone. One man chased his wife from his
home because she had refused to "spread the
virus and kill as many as possible before we die".
Although in Butula a woman can marry more
than one husband, she is not allowed to repair her
house. Since tradition supercedes the fear of
Aids, a widow will easily accept to be inherited by
a brother-in-law or her husband's cousin just so
that he can repair her house or build her a new
one.
That was Mildred Atieno's predicament when
the roof of her house caved in. Although she
knew she had Aids, she did not divulge this to her
inheritor and told him that her husband was
killed through witchcraft.
Encouraging people to go for testing has also
become counterproductive. "So, what next after
testing?" asks Makokha. "Without lifelong counselling,
those infected get withdrawn and are
likely to engage in dangerous behaviour."
Makokha says the government must go a step
further in the fight against Aids and help those
with HIV live productive lives by training them in
income-generating activities. It should also give
them soft loans to them start businesses.
She proposes another radical step: "The yeT
cards given to clients don't indicate one's status.
This has made it possible for some people to fool
their partners by telling them that their status
would be indicated on the card if they were
infected. This would not happen if one's status
was clearly stated on the card."
This proposal is likely to generate a lot of heat,
but it is time effective ways were found to win the
war against Aids, says Makokha.