DAILY NATION JUNE 16, 2004

BUT THERE IS GREAT HOPE FOR THE FUTURE
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 1
necessary for survival and development.
These are gross violations of the rights of women
and children, and as long as they persist - and the
circumstances that give rise to them remain
unchanged -human development will be compromised.
Children and women are among the first to suffer
when crises rip off the covers of seemingly peaceful
families to reveal the turmoil that exists.
Over '30 wars have sullied the African continent
since 1970, mostly within states, and accounted for
more than half of all war-related deaths worldwide
in 1996. The wars caused more than 8 million people
to become refugees, returnees or displaced persons.
,
, At the same time, there is pervasive violence in
both the industrialised and developing countries
that runs through children and women in their families
and communities, in themass media and entertainment.
The incidence of violence within the family,
though hidden from the public and statistics, is
almost certainly the most persistent, sparing no
society or culture as it trickles down from one generation
to the next, turning children reared on violence
into violent adults. '
However, in ~frica, the social and economic d,evastation
caused by HIV/Aids in the last decadc: is
greater than the combined destruction of the
continent's wars.
An estimated 200,000 Africans, most of them
women and children died as a result of conflicts in
1998 while 2 million people were killed by HIV/
Aids.
From country to country, the pandemic has
swept through sub-Saharan Africa, where 23.3
million people, mainly the young, poor and powerless
- girls and women in particular - now live
with HIV/Aids.
While the educated have access to
the necessary information to protect
themselves from the virus, the life- Most a'ff:ected saving information is not finding its I(JJ {
~~~. to those with little or no educa- by poverty
Around Africa, HIV/Aids is spread- •
ing the web of poverty and chronic atV"e'chl)ldtV"en insecurity in many societies, especially , I (;, I
those burdened by heavy national d debt. The stress on their limited social an women services is unbearable.
A decline in food production has led
to poorer nutrition and greater vulnerability to illness.
Lower education budgets mean less schooling
for boys and girls, who are later less able to
defend themselves against violence and abuse.
According to State of the World's Children 2004
report, there are an estimated 11 million children
orphaned by HIV /Aids in sub-Saharan Africa, and
these are often the first children to lose the
support of extended families for their attending
school, and double orphans are even less likely to
attend school.
Girls lose out more than boys because the burden
of caring for sick relatives falls disproportionately on
them. In many families, ,the report notes, HIVrelated
illnesses and the c nsequent loss in earnings
make sending a child to sc pol impossible.
After families, educatio iis the next perimeter of a
protective environment fo 'children since schools can
be a powerful protective force
in m st children's lives, especially
for girls and those who are
high! 'vulnerable.
Ed cation remains a key safeguar
" preventing child labour
and elping to combat sexual
expl itation, which mainly
threa ¢ns girls. A school going
girl i 'less likely to be drawn in
to t ¢ exploitative forms of
work outside the home and is
also fawn away from the sometimes
excessive domestic 1Hies.
A Unicef survey of ho ~eholds in 25 sub-Saharan
African countries indicat d that 31 per cent of children
aged between five a d 14 are engaged in unconditional
forms of child la our that should be eliminated
such as slavery trafficking and forced
recruitment for the purpo es of armed conflict, prostitution
and pornography Besides, nine per cent are