Daily Nation! July 7, 2004
By KWAMBOKA OYARO

MOST CASES OF MENTAL RETARDATION ARE MILD.

person with an intellectual functioning
level (IQ) below 70, and who shows significant limitations in two or more adap-

tive skills from childhood is said to be mentally

handicapped. Adaptive skills include communi-
cation, social skills, functional ,!cademics
(reading, writing, basic maths), and work. How-
ever, a person with limited intellectual function-
ing but unlimited adaptive skills is not 'necessar
ily mentally handicapped .
Estimates put the number of mentally
retarded people worldwide at three per cent of · p
the global population. In Kenya, there are 2.7
million mentally retarded people out of a total
population of between 6.2 and 7.5 million people
with disabilities. Mental retardation affects peo-
ple of al! races. Th~ highest percentage are only
oun
mildly affected, and this is noticed when they pro
slower than their colleagues in acquiring new info
mation and skills. It is not easy to detect mental

lead independent lives as adults.
retardation in children in this group until they g

school. With the right environment, they are able

Similarly, early intervention and support from
the communify can help the severely affected.
However, not much can be done for extreme cases.
The level of mental retardation is established
through conducting intelligence tests by a qualified
- person. This involves observation, formal testing,
interviewing key people in the individual's life,
interviewing the person"'and interacting with the
erson in his or her daily life.
Although a number of conditions that impair the
brain's development, leading to mental retardation
before or during birth, as well as in early childhood,
are known, in a large number of cases the cause
ve
r-
.Genetic - abnormality of genes inherited from
paren ts                             "
shows, smoking during pregnancy
o to
.Use of alcohol, drugs and, as recent research
to
.Women infected with HIV may pass the virus to

their child, leading to future brain damage
.IlInesses like syphilis, German measles, malnut
tion (marasmus and kwashiorkor) during preg-
nancy
.Prematurity and low birth weight
• Childhood diseases such as meningitis, whoopin
cough, chicken pox and measles can damage the
brain and nervous system. A blow to the head or
near-drowning can also damage the brain.
.Lead, mercury and other environmental toxins
are dangetous
.Inadequate medical care
.Under-stimulation    can result in irreversible
damage and can lead to mental retardation.
.Pregnancy after 40 years, which. often leads to
giving birth to a Down's Syndrome child
and wife

.Blood factor incompatibility between husband

Mental retardation can be prevented through

screening of newborns, thyroid hormone replace-
ment therapy and dietary treatment.
Treating the child while it is still in the womb
prevents severe jaundice in newborns. Other
treatments include vaccinations against childhood
diseases.
Precautionary measures include using safety
seats and helmets to prevent possible head trau-
ma; good care for women before and during preg-
nancy and taking folic acid supplements during
the first 12 weeks of pregnancy.
(See related story on Page 3)
