Daily Nation/ June 23, 2004

THE PACKAGE THAT CHANGED MY LIFE
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 1

behind my visit to the centre, to which I calmly
responded: 'Ningependa kujua hali yangu ya
maisha. '( I would like to know my HIV status.) The
friendly counsellor nodded reassuringly. With this
encouragement, I rattled on, " you know I have so
many lovers but there is one whom I have not seen
for too long. I do not know her whereabouts."
"Nyawira then asked whether I had any information
about HIV/Aids. I told her that I had heard my
friends talk about it. I also informed her thatukihanya
hanya - if one gets involved in casual sex -
chances of contracting the virus are ver)'lhigh.
"I was confident through most of the session,
calmly answering the counsellor's questions. But
when she asked me whetber I knew how to use a
condom properly, I was thrown off balance. At
first, I asserted with a qualified yes but when she
asked me to demonstrate how to use it with the aid
of a wooden penile object, I blushed and remained
motionless in my seat.
"Nyawira discovered that I was stuck but told me
not to worry and then took charge of the lesson."Like any person who wants to take an HIV
test, I was required to sign a form indicating that I
had consented to the test.
"When everything had been explained to me, I
mustered the courage to take test. As I patiently
waited for my results, counsellor Nyawira
indulged me in a light conversation.
I confided in her that I dropped out of Jamhuri
Pgma!y School in 1994, when I was in Standard
Three. I was the biggest boy in our class and every
time something went wrong, the younger pupils
shouted out my name. On several occasions, I was
punished for cr:imes I never committed. '
"I have very many friends at Kerima base -
the parking lot a between Jogoo House and the
Uchumi Supermarket on Agha Khan Walk in Nairobi.
If you go there and ask.for Mbugua Gunior)
with a missing tooth, you will be told that I shifted
base to the Kenyatta Market base.
'Finally, the long-awaited moment arrived. The
bespectacled counsellor asked me whether I could
read my own results. 'From the explanation you
gave me before taking my blood sample, I do not
have the virus that causes Aids,' I declared.
"The counsellor confirmed that I was right and
went on to give me som I tips on how to avoid getting
infected with the virus th lt causes Aids, as well as
how to live positively w' ~ the virus.
Later, she offered ~ a cup of tea and escorted
me to the gate with a $pecial gift: 300 condoms. I
shared them with my fr ¢nds but also kept some, just
in case ..
My girlfriend, Monic , who lives in Mbotela, Nai·
robi, was overwhelmed ith joy on hearing that I was
HIV-free. My fellow st e': boys and girls respect me
more ever since news my courageous act reached
them. In fact, some of hem said they would follow
suit but they haven't mustered the courage to do so
yet.,
"Now that I know that I am not infected with the
Aids-causing virus, I am seriously going to start trying
to get an Identity Card, ev~n though the cumbersome
procedures involved make it very difficult
for a street boy to have one. I would also like to
train as a driver.
"I'd like to appeal to street families, as well as
members of public who have not yet gone for the
Aids to do so. No one can force you to take the test
but it is good to know the state of your health.   