Daily Nation! Tuesday, November 23, 2004 
We're victims of interested group hysteria and general insecurity, says firm
Daggers drawn at restive Del Monte again
NOOs, led by the Kenya Human
Rights Commission (KHRC), were to
act as independent monitors to ensure
that the company kept its end of the
bargain ..
Daniel Kyule, a veteran of the protests
of the late 90s and current national
. chairman of the Kenya Union of Com- b... mercial ~ood and A~lied Workers (Kuf-
,... caw), whIch had to fIght to be recog-
[f;. nised by the management, says a lot has
~ changed at Del Monte since those frac-
~ tious days.
1(;' "Our campaign was not in vain and I I am proud of it. Today, this firm is a bet-
, ter employer and neighbour.
,. "The minimum wage in the plantations
is Sh6,SOO,excluding other benefits
like housing and healthcare for the
223 workers. Even for the casuals in the
factories, the least paid gets $51 (Sh413)
a day, which is far better than most
firms in this kind of business. But most
important is that the firm has embraced
dialogue with its workers and neighbours,"
he says.
The firm has a total workforce of
about 6,000 employees on which it uses
Sh1.2 billion salaries and benefits a
year.
In order to get its products back on
ED market shelves, which currently
take up about 90 per cent of its output
and previously bought everything, it has
had to achieve the highest benchmarks
in corporate behaviour and farm practice.
"We are the only firm in Africa out of
South Africa to receive a Social
Accountability 8000 certification.
This means every six months, all our
~ operations regarding workers rights,
environmental rights, health, safety and
social development are audited by an
independent group from Europe. We
are also ISO 900112000 certified," says
Dr Bertolli.
In·the latest flare-up, Del Monte has
been put on the dock after its guards -
the firm employs a staggering 285 to
secure its pineapple plantations! -
unleashed dogs on a group of people
who are alleged to have been stealing
ripe fruit.
The matter has since gone to court,
but the reverberations it has ignited run
deep:
A fresh slate of demands has been
tabled by residents of one of the villages
neighbouring the factory and a slew of
local and Nairobi-based lobbies that
have taken up their cause.
A meeting held by the two sides on
November 9 to resolve the issue ended
in gridlock after the firm refused to discuss
compensation for the dog bite victims
and a new grouse: some 38 women
who had been allegedly raped by the
firm's guards over the last three years.
. But the firm insisted that these matters
were criminal and should be handled
by the criminal justice syst~m. At
that parley activist and former MP Njeru
Kathangu gave out single names of
guards who had allegedly committed the
acts of rape.
"We do not condone crime by any
member of staff. We only ask for full
information before we can act and single
names simply won’t do. There are no
cover-ups for the simple reason that we
have nothing to hide and rn these days of
transparency and monitoring, it would
clearly not work in our favour,” says Dr
Bertolli.
1-le has discerned an interesting pat
tern in the agitation against the firm
over the years. While the villagers are
more concerned with what the firm can
do to improve their lot, the NGOs are
keener on more protracted issues like
compensation, which “provide for racier
headlines.” Dialogue suffers as the two
sides pull in different directions.
Evidence would seem to bear him oui,
according to documents obtained by
Business Week.
The firm says il can only do so much
in “playing government.” Its corporate
social responsibility (SR) programme,
on which it spent ShlO million last year,
concentrates on water provision, envi
ronmental improvement, HI V/Aids
awareness and famine relief among oth
ers.
“We do not believe in handouts, so we
don’t give them. The entire fulcrum of
our CSR platform is partnership with
the community since this is the only way
to make our projects sustainable says
human resources manager Purity Muth
amia.
But is Del Mônte the victim of what
has been called the protest industry in
Kenya. a factor which has been fmgered
as one of the biggest emerging threats to
investment of any sort in this country,
with professional critics and ambulance-
chasing activists waiting in the wings to
torpedo any investment for donors’ dol
lars and persona] promotion?
Dr Bertolli is non-committal, but he is
concerned that some of the NGOs only
surface when there is a problem around
which to agitate.
Del Monte’s 28-strong population of
what it insists are “trained and disci
plined” canines has been an emotive
matter between the transnational and
the local community, which views their
use as oppressive and a hangover from
the dark days of colonialism.
But there are also deep sociological
nuances. True, man’s best friend has
always been a strong symbol of hatred
and invective in African society.
The firm maintains it is compelled to
use them only when its guards are
attacked by “machete-wielding pineap
ple thieves.”
“Most of the time, we are not dealing
with petty thieves, but well-organised
gangs of sometimes as many as 100
armed men. Our employees have been
attacked in the past and even one guard
got killed. We have a right to protect
ourselves,” interjects Ms Muthamia.
Efforts to outsource the costly secu
rity component of its function to other
firms, so that it does not directly take
the flak for any spats with the commu
nity have collapsed.
A fencing project failed to stand after
villagers uprooted the structure.
The firm needs at least 1,500 tonnes
of fruit a day to keep operating at 80 per
cent capacity. Given the seasonal nature
of the crop, it takes precise planning lo
ensure there is adequate supply
throughout the year.
Bulk stealing — which the firm says
persists despite its interventions —
-upsets this delicate equilibrium.
As the battle drums are sounded for
another season of ferment over the suc
culent fruits that threaten to become the
curse of Thika, it is the kind of distrac
tion Dr Bertolli can do without.