Daily Nation/ Friday, April 9, 2004
Feeble story
lines taint
festival finals


BY ANTHONY NJAGI
The plays that have so far beeri presented at finals of the
National Schools and Colleges Drama Festival at Lenana
School in Nairobi reveal an appalling lack of artistic quality,
especially with regard to script writing. Even those
that rate highly with regard to acting and directing still
fall far short of expectations in terms of story lines.
So far, only.Dilapidations ,by State House Girls and A New School.
of Thought by St')bseph's Rapogi froni Nyanza have shown fairly'
clear story lines, In ooth cases, it is at least possible to tell what the
story is about: .
But most other plays have many problems with regard to"character_
and character development. It is even difficult to discuss the characters
because they either do not develop or the writers gi.ve only one:
side of them .. '
When such writers are unsure of what more to do with the characters
any further, they resort to having a crowd oil stage. But even in'
these crowds, it is difficult to isolate and follow anyone character
clearly because they are only brought in for a minute to either shout
or cry. Schools that have fallen into this trap include Koyonzo Sec- _
ondary School, Mary Hill Girls' School, St Paul's Seminary and even
Mavoko Secondary School.
Poor symbolism
ript writers would do well to pay close attention to details of charac~
terisation to give depth to their plays, but also to make them meaningful,
as it is through the characters that the author's intention is
communicated. '
There were also notable problems with symbolism and imagery,
which any good writer needs to use carefully to ensure effective com~
munication.
A case in point were the ambiguous images in the play by Kamwenja
Tea<;hers' College, which
left the audience wondering what
message the writer' intended to
communicate. For example, what
did the daughter symbolise after
the writer had established that the
mother symbolised Kenya? What
about the crowds? Who do they
represent, given that they act uniformly?
Besides, there were two
- husbands, but it was not clear
what they represented.
Another institution whose play
had unclear symbols was Moi High School Kabarak. The symbol of
the castle, for example, remains superfluous.
Things were a bit' better in the dance category, with Kalara by
Mukumu Girls' High School, worthy of mention.
Kalara is the story a young woman by the same .name, who is
_ living with Aids. As the dance opens Kalara is in distress. Her hus- -
band has just ·sdied of Aids-related causes, and she is a stigmatised
woman. The villagers will neither buy her goods at the market norallow
her to· draw water from the village well. She turns to the
church, which also rejects her.
In despair, Kalara attempts suicide but is saved by a good Samaritan.
She also _attempts to murder her children to save them from'
stigmatisation, but falls. Finally, she goes to a vcr centre, where she
gets counselling.
t Effective message l The vcr worker also talks to community members, who agree to
!. '~'ptK,J", b,cr. f Choreographed by Musambayi Samba and Yakhama Mike, the
I.. dance effectively conveys the intended message. However, there are
~ome scenes where overcrowding is evident on stage, which inte,r-
~ feres with the movement of the performers.
Also marring the presentation were the dancers' gaudy biker's
shorts. The producer should invest more in costumes in future as the
shorts were rather unsightly. -
Then there was the implausible manner in.which the conflict was
resolved. When Kalara is reintegrated into society, she opens a vcr
centre. Yet she was a small-time trader.
Kalara is a poor jobless woman, and having her open a kiosk
would have been more believable. Among the outstanding dancers_
were Beatrice Riziki, who acts as'the'depressed Kalara; Joy Lodeni
and Ethel Palapala, acting as teacher and pastor respectively; Vera
Atsango and MitchelleLyambila, who play the doctors; and Cynthia
Muka and BeFyl Wangkal as the children.
The story-line of Kalara is simple to follow and quite interesting.
The events unfold chronologically and tl1eplot is easy to follow. The
theme is also topical: el).couraging pepple to stop discriminating
against those living with HIV and Aids and'to go for voluntary tests.