Daily Nation/ Thursday September 30, 2004

ACCESS TO ARVS TO IMPROVE FURTHER

Due to accelerated
price drop, there has
been a 10-fold rise in
demand between
2000 and 2003 .

By Correspondent
Accessibility to HIV drugs in Kenya is
due to improve further with the
anticipation that other local pharmaceutical
companies are going to apply
for production rights from British drug manufacturer
GlaxoSmithKline.
According to Dr William Mwatu, medical and
regulatory director at GlaxoSQ1ithKline, who
voluntarily gave production rights to Cosmos last-
, such requests will be assessed on their own
;,ts as they came..
Wider coverage
"The more partners we can involve in the fight
against the disease will translate into a wider
coverage in the region," Dr Mwatu told Horizon
recently.
"Due to the accelerated drop in prices, there
has been a 10-fold rise in demand between 2000
~. and 2002," he explained.
Last week, GSK gave the green light to Cosmos
to start producing generic versions of the
drugs Epivir and Retrovir, for the three East
African Community countries, as well as
Rwanda and Burundi. Prior to the signing of the
agreement, GSK held the patent and the sole
rights to manufacture and distribute the drugs
across the region ..
According to Dr Prakash Patel, the chairman
and chief executive of Cosmos, the new development
could see the price of ARVs in the region
fall by as much as 40 per cent.
Price reductions
"When everything is on full stream, the price
reductions will be in the region of 40 to 50 per
cent," Dr Patel has been quoted as saying.
"Because of experiences learnt from this
ground-breaking agreement, we anticipate that
future negotiations will take a shorter time,"
predicted Dr Mwatu who said that the negotiations
between the two parties had taken a whole
one year.
The interpretation of what constitutes a good
partn~r is one who offers high quality products,
are accessible and such an initiative is
sustainable. The generics or any other medical
drug,.says Dr Mwatu are only helpful if they can get
to the patients on time, are in good quality and are
accessible to patients who need them. More partners
are expected to translate to a wider distribution
network that is closer and responsive to the
local people.
"Our decision to voluntarily allow Cosmos and
possibly other companies later is part of our social
responsibility in fighting what can be termed the
biggest health crisis in recent times," said Dr
Mwatu.
On loyalties, he says, GSK is only asking Cosmos
to pay 5 per cent instead of the industry average·of
25 per cent. "This means we are giving away some
of our rights and we are convinced it is for the bigger
good for the region."
Currently, GSK sells antiretrovirals products at
preferential prices in Sub-Saharan Africa and will
continue to do so for the foreseeable future. GSK is
also involved in various collaborative studies in
Africa with among others the Kenya Medical
Research Institute and the Centers for Disease
Control to find new protocals in the management
of HIV.
"Aparffrom investing in studies to come up with
new therapies, the various arms of research are also
investigating new HIV management technologies,"
says Dr Mwatu. One of their concerns, they say,
is to help bring down the cost associated with
the management of HIV which, combined, constitute
a significant cost component So they
are asking such questions like: Is it possible to
find new ways of diagnosing and monitoring the
progression of HIV that are us~ful in resource
poor countries?
"We are investigating alternative methods of
monitoring patients on retrovirals that can be
useful in this part of the world," he said
According to the World Trade Organisation's
intellectual property law, a voluntary licence
such as the one granted by GSK to Cosmos can
only be awarded by the patent holder to a third
party. In extreme cases, however, countries facing
medical emergencies can unilaterally issue
compulsory licences to allow local firms to make
medicines locally.
Generics
Last week, during the brief ceremony at GSK
headquarters in Nairobi, at which Cosmos was
officially given the go-ahead to produce the
generics, Kenyan Trade and Industry Minister,
Dr Mukhisa Kituyi, said that he had not yet
ruled out the possibility invoking compulsory
licences for ARVs whose patents are held by
multinationals who were reluctant to do so voluntarily.
"We prefer to see multinational companies
issue voluntary licences to local firms as GSK
has done," Dr Kituyi, a strong voice for the
developing world at WTO parleys, said. "If need
be, however, we will issue compulsory licences."
Church programmes
Currently, only about 60,000 HI V-positive East
Africans out of an estimated 600,000 who need
treatment for Aids are on ARVs, mostly
through government, NGO or church-supported
programmes using imported generics. Treatment
at Kenyan government hospitals currently
costs about Sh3,000 ($38) a month.
Other Kenyan firms which have expressed an
intention to start producing generic ARVs are
Laboratory & Allied and Universal
Pharmaceuticals.