Sunday Nation! March 21, 2004

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 2
MINUTES OF LATENESS BETWEEN LIFE AND DEATH

orphans live with custodians - mostly their
grandparents or aunties and uncles.
"I thought the extended family unit was the
best suited to take care of the orphans, obviously
better than an orphanage. The children come
together often to play and share ideas," says
Mwende.
On a voluntary basis, Dr Sarah Onyango,
Twana Twitu's deputy director, Dr Sarah
Onyango and Mwende's father, Mr Maluki Mwinzi,
co-ordinate the organisation's events in Kenya.
Every month they deliver maize flour, cooking
fat, sugar, and soap to the children. Mwende then
sends money to settle the bill and school fees. The
guardians are fed too and clothed.
Social worker Mrs Mutune Nzinzi goes round
the various homes to make sure the children are
fed and go to school.
Twana Twitu has arranged with Muthale Mission
Hospital, Mwingi, for medical care of the
orphans. Plans are under way to provide the HIVpositive
ones with free anti-retroviral drugs. Here
, there is a problem though. Most of the guardians
won't allow their children to undergo the HIV
test, maybe due to .the stigma associated with the
affliction.
As she recounts her experience of that dark
September 11, Mwende can't help thinking how
she missed death by a whisker. "Everything just
went wrong. First I woke up feeling unwell. I contemplated
calling my office to say I was unwell but
abandoned the idea. I wasn't that sick after all; I
was pregnant with my second son and such cases
of discomfort were not unexpected."
Late to work
Mwende was destined to be late to work on that
fateful September 11. Probably her lateness that
day saved her life. When she got a few metres
from her office, the first plane hit the Twin Towers.
Mwende's "mission" to help the poor started
rather by fluke. She was on vacation in Kenya
and, as she went through the obituary pages, she
noticed that many of the dead people were aged
between 26 and 45. A good number of them succumbed
to HIV/Aids. Her village Migwani was
not spared as several couples had died of the disease,
leaving their children helpless. Mwende's
father told her of a couple in the neighbourhood
who had died. She visited the home and decided
to start assisting the four orphans and their grandmother
in a small way.
Born 32 years ago to Maluki and Mary
Mwinzi, Mwende and her sister Kavathe
and brother Muthinzi grew up in Kitui
town. "We speak fluent Kikamba and
are very proud of it."
Her parents met in America where her father
had gone for studies. She was born there, and the
family came to Kenya when she was 18 months
old. Her father taught at Kitui High School for
many years while her mother was the headmistress
at Mulango Girls. They have since retired.
Mwende attended Kitui Central Primary School
from 1977 - 1983, Kenya High School, Nairobi,
1984-85, and Kyeni Girls in Embu for her Alevels,
1986-87. The following year she left for the
US where she joined the Grand Canyon University
in Arizona and later Phoenix University to
study marketing.
Her first job
Mwende worked with Rubin Postaer, a media
agency in Los Angeles from 1992-94. Then she
moved to KCOP-Channel13 in Los Angeles as a
sales assistant, Interpost Systems as a pricing analyst
before leaving in 1997. She joined Nomura
Corporate Research and Asset Management as a
marketing associate and rose through the ranks to
become the Deputy Vice-President. Here she is
responsible for investment proposals and marketing
strategies.
She is married to Nigerian lawyer Emeka Edozie,
who practises in New York. "I met him in New
Jersey in 1995 but we started dating in 1997. We
were wedded in Mwingi in 1999," says a beaming
Mwende. Their first son, Mezz, was born in June
2000 and the second son, Jaden, in March 2002.
Says the young woman from Migwani: "I adore
my community which has supported me all
through. I love Kenya, it's my home. I'm very
close to my community. There are people 1
admire who are not necessarily involved in my
kind of service. People like Nelson Mandela
and Mother Teresa who did a lot for their
communities."
During a visit to Kenya a couple of weeks
ago, she was distributing condoms and pamplets
to young people milling around her at
Twana Twitu centre in Migwani. Her reason
for that: "Prevention is the best cure. I don't
want to God by telling people what
to do and what not to do. I agree abstinence is
the best method to prevent HlY/Aids but the
fact is that people are having sex."
Mwende has big plans for the future. She
wants to expand Twana Twitu to all parts of
Kenya. However, this means she has to raise
lots of money for that. She is liaising with
other organisations in Kenya and America.
One of them is the African Regional Youth
Initiative, which has programmes for
orphans. They hold community bazaars to
educate the youth about HIV/Aids.
She has approached Touch Africa and
the Michael' Wamalwa Foundation and
they are working together on some
programmes.
In the US, Mwende has approached big
organisations like Fubu and Payless -
clothing and shoe
designers - as well
as Children's Place.
Another organisation,
Books for
Africa, has offered
to donate books,
computers and
Internet facilities to
the Twana Twitu Centre in Migwani.
Mwende is organising a big fundraising
rally in New York on June 5. She is appealing
to all Kenyans in America and other
organisations for support. Details can be
obtained from their website.

I was pulled out of Twin Towers debris, my baby survived
BY MWENDE MWINZI

Likemany other days in my sleep-deprived life, Tues -
day, September 11,2001, started off with an alarm
clock negotiation ... five minutes - let's make it 10
- okay, just two more minutes pleeease! My bed was
just as I liked it; nice, toasty, and luring, begging me to stay on.
"Perhaps I should call in sick?" I thought sneakily.
"Time to get up!" my husband Emeka said as he left for
work. Urgh! I gave up on the idea of more sleep and crawled
out reminding myself that much work awaited me and further,
that I best not take my good health for granted. I had much to
be grateful for, after alii had a job I liked, a dynamic family and
the great news of expectancy. In six more months, Emekaand I
would welcome our second child into the familY:That atone was
, reason to face the day!
A quick look at the clock prompted me to scurry. It was
already 7.35 am and I had an 8.02 am train to catch from the
Scarsdale Station, which was 10 minutes away. I allowed the
~how~r t? drizzle on me briefly before quickly dressing and
Jumping Into my car.
The fear of tardiness had sobered me. At work, I was always
the late culprit; what excuse would I give this time? I slammed
on the accelerator and charged down the street. "Move it!" I
screamed at the truck driver ahead of me. Where was he going,
anyway, at this hour of the day? And in no hurry lit that ...
Honk! "Let me pass!" .
I arrived at the train station just in time to see my train pull
out. This was not good but I had to tough it out.
Waiting for next train
At 9.10 am mytrain pulled into New York's Grand Central Station.
My goal was simple; make it to work by 9.30 am. Anything
later would have been obnoxious. I hopped onto the New York
City Subway's train number five and headed downtown counting
everyone of the 20 minutes the commuter took. So focused
was I on the time that I almost missed the conductor's
announcement that the train would not stop at my normal stop,
Fulton Street. Seeing as this was the exit to the World Trade
Centre, whioh was adjoined to the building in which my office
was, the World Financial Centre, I should have worried that
something was wrong. Instead, I celebrated. "Yippee!" I
thought; that was my excuse - train problems!
Armed with that, I leapt off the train at the next station,
Brooklyn Bridge, to call work and explain my tardiness. Ring!
Ring! Finally, "Hello Security!" Huh? Why security? The
building had been evacuated, he said. No reason given.
The train passed the Fulton Street exit and pulled into the
Wall Street station to the smell of fire. "Oh yeah! Sumtin' about
a plane!" a lady said. I would get the horrific details minutes later.
The street~ were chaotic. Between the wild crowds, smoke
and paper, this was not the place to be. "Keep on moving!
C'mon, let's go!" pushed the police. We complied - keeping on
moving upward north, and closer it ... closer to the Trade Centre.
I was unprepared for what I saw. Hanging out of the ever so
tall skyscrapers were people frantically waving pieces of paper
and pleading for rescue. People I had probably passed in the
c~rri~ors at some point or other. Yet here they were, burning
alive In front of all of us. "Oh my God ... this is so evil!" I kept
on repeating. Why would anyone be so cruel?
Suddenly, as I was looking up, a lady, at least 50 flights up,
jumped out of the window. "Oh no!" the crowd collectively
screamed. And then another. It was too much to bear. My heart
was pounding, my head getting dizzy, I had tears streaming
down my face and my stomach feeling ill ... no, I couldn't pass
out here. I had to leave. And so I turned.
And I heard it - the crackle! The crackle that I thought was
~ ch.ipfalling off the building; the crackle that triggered my
instincts to run; the crackle that would redefine my life.
"Damn!"
The crowd began to scatter, running and screaming frantically,
carrying me with the motions - praying, crying, begging ...
"God please don't let me fall, please don't let me fall, God
please!"
And then it went dark ... pitch dark. Minutes later, still in the
dark, I began to have eerie thoughts. Was I alive or did I just
think I was alive! My body, though pressed down by weight, felt
miraculously light. Was I a ghost? And then I heard them ...
the jet fighters. They were coming back for us - to bomb us - to
finish us off; this was it! I had survived the blast and now I was
going to die - alone, far from my husband, without my children
and a long way from home. I was going to die alone, like an animal
on the dirty streets of New York.
And then a voice out of nowhere said: "If you are alive anti
can hear me, get up and move!" I had heard him. I was alive!
But I couldn't move. Smoke, dust, debris anel dread were weighing
me down. "Oh God!" I thought, I was either going to suffocate
or starve to death.
I recall the calm with which I had made that realisation.
Amazingly, I had little fear; rather, a sense of dread - a sense
of despair. I remember lying there wondering how long it would.