Sunday Nation! March 28, 2004

THOUGHT OF SUNDAY
SEX EDUCATION:
TO TEACH OR NOT TO TEACH SCHOOL CHILDREN
BY JOE BABENDRIEIER

Ten years ago Kenyans were embroiled
in a debate over sex education in primary
schools. Some NOOs were pushing
or it. Many parents were trying to stop it.
Several bills were proposed in Parliament. In
the end, the parents prevailed. More recently,
without any fanfare or debate, the government
issued a new syllabus. All children are
now deep into the details of sex. Primary textbooks
depict human reproductive organs as
explicitly as anything previously reserved for
biology lessons in Form 3, Under the title of
preventing the spread of Aids, teachers are
mandated by the new X-4-4syllabus to
instruct nine-year-old boys and girls all about
acts proper to marital intimacy.
Some of the textbooks recommend abstinence
oefore marriage, but others recommend
using condoms "in case the children are
thinking of having sex anytime soon". Telling
this to 16-year-olds confuses them. Telling
this to 10-year-olds usually does permanent
damage, robbing them of their natural innocence.
It gets worse. The new textbooks written for
the new syllabus never come close to telling
the children the most important fact they
need to know. Having sex before marriage is
always wrong for everybody because it causes
spiritual and emotional harm even when people
manage to avoid getting infected.
Parents used to get furious over these issues.
Where are they now? There are two answers.
On one hand, many of the parents who
opposed the introduction of sex education in
the early 1990s no longer have children in primary
school. Ten years is a longtime. The
political events of the last decade - everyone
examining their stake in the constitutional
review -have made it hard to focus on academic
issues. On the other hand, morals have
degenerated. Today's pupils are the children
of parents who grew up with that. Few of
these new parents care about schools teaching
sex education. Most of them learned the
basics from friends or strangers, not from parents.
They managed to distance themselves
far enough from promiscuity to start a family.
So they have little idea of why sex education
requires parental involvement. Now that they
have their own children, they arc mainly worried
about HIV and other incurable infections.
It may be a bit late to sound the trumpet, but
parents with little children should also be
worried about dangers worse than disease.
Children struggle with gender identity: Boys
wrestling with what it means to be male, girls
discovering the feminine mystique. As adults
we forget how fragile they are. One mistake
can be psychologically fatal. Sex is profoundly
personal. Each child needs an individual
approach when learning the facts of life.
Putting lit~le boys and girls together in a classroom
and showing them detailed drawings
while explaining the act of sex is the worst
way to introduce them to the origins of life. It
can do irreparable damage. If you are a parent,
your child could be one of the casualties.
After 30 years of sex education in public
schools in America and Europe, the prevalence
rates for sexually transmitted diseases
are higher than ever - and so are the number
of men and women with sexual dysfunctions.
Look at the male side of it. A father may feel
embarrassed to sit down with his son and tell
him how a baby is born. Perhaps his own
father never explained it to him. That makes
it doubly difficult. Even so, if he avoids talking
to his son, the boy will one day wonder
why everyo'ne feels guilty about the deed that
explains his existence - as if it were an act of
prostitution the parents would rather forget.
This diminishes the boy's respect for his
mother. If the father explains his love for his
wife and how the boy was conceived in her
. womb, the son will forever look at this
woman with a sense of awe and reverence.
If we want boys to learn how to treat women
with respect, we have to start here. A boy
cannot respect other women until he respects
his own mother first. Women complain about
being abused. The current programme of sex
education will only make things worse.