Sunday Nation/ March 7, 2004

FIRST LADY STOP VIOLENCE

BY OSCAR OBONYO; VICTOR BWIRE AND PPS

First Lady Lucy Kibaki has decried
increased cases of gender-based violence.
She said the vice should be stopped
at all costs as it was a leading cause of
injury and death for women, particularly
during this era of the Aids pandemic
where fear of violence exposed
them to the scourge.
"The fear of violence prevents
women from insisting on safe sex. Prevention
of gender violence, therefore,
will lead to a reduction in HlV/Aids
cases," she said.
The First Lady made the remarks on
Friday night during the third anniversary
celebrations of the Nairobi Women's
Hospital's Gender Violence
Recovery Centre. Noting that economic
dependency makes women
vulnerable to physical arid psychological
abuse, Mrs Kibaki called for the
empowerment of women through
mainstreaming of gender issues in all
development activities.
She praised the government for
enacting the Gender Commission Bill,
saying this will help in the coordination
and mainstreaming of gender
matters in national development.
The First Lady urged nongovernmental
organisations and members
of the civil society involved in
women's empowerment to augment
the government's initiative.
Mrs Kibaki said: "It is only when
women gain their place as equal members
of society that gender violence will
be overcome."
She stressed the need for more specialised
medical facilities to treat and
rehabilitate victims of gender violence.
The First Lady presented awards to
sponsors and supporters of the Gender
Violence Recovery Centre.
Meanwhile, trade union officials have
sounded the alarm over sexual harassment
of female workers ahead of the
International Women's Day to be
observed tomorrow.
The head of Women's Affairs at the
Central Organisation of Trade Unions,
Ms Monica Musau, said most perpetrators
of the vice are foreigners in the tex-
tile, garment and leather industries.
"The rampant cases of sexual abuse
at the work place have contributed
greatly to unwanted pregnancies, HIV
spread and family break-ups," she
said.
Now, the Central Organisation of
Trade Unions demands that the government
enacts laws to protect workers
in export processing zones and
civil servants from being molested.
Cotu assistant secretary general
George Odiko warned that sexual
harassment and violence in the work
place were ~ major cause of industrial
unrest. Mr Odiko asked the government,
Federation of Kenya
Employers and trade unions to come
up with structures that support workers'
rights.
In Nairobi, a special function to celebrate
the girl-child education has
been arranged to mark the event. The
function will be presided over by Education
Permanent Secretary Prof Karega
Mutahi at the Kenya Institute of
Education.
Globally, there are 10 million more
girls out of school than boys. Eightythree
per cent of all girls out of school
in the world live in sub-Saharan Afri- ,
ca, South Asia, East Asia llnd the
Pacifico
In addition to being denied a primary
education, girls are also more
likely to fail to complete secondary
education than boys because of early
marriage and early pregnancy.
Girls denied an education are more
vulnerable to hunger, violence, abuse,
exploitation and trafficking. They are
more likely to die in childbirth and
are at greater risk of HIV/Aids, says
the Unicef boss.