Sunday Nation! November 28, 2004
UN reports more women at risk of Aids infection

BY SUNDAY NATION CORRESPONDENT

HIV/Aids is fast acquiring a feminine face in
African countries like Kenya, as biological vulnerability,
poverty and sexual violence join to
raise infection rates for young women and girls,
a report from UNA ids has warned.
According to the UN agency's report on the
epidemic for this year, although men basically
'drive the epidemic, women and girls now make
up 60 per cent of those infected with HIV in
Africap countries, with an average 13 women
infected for every 10 men. The ratios are even
more lop-sided between the sexes for the 15 to
24 age group, where 76 per cent of all.
"Young women aged 15 to 24 years are especially
bearing the brunt of new infections in
sub-Saharan Africa," says the report. "Recent
population-based studies suggest that there are
on average 36 young women (in this age group)
living.with HIV for every 10 infected young
men."
In Kenya, which is cited as one of the countries
in eastern Africa where HIV prevalence is
falling, the report says at least 750,000 of the
estimated 1.2 million people infected with HIV
are women.
Kenya's national HIV prevalence rate cur-
per cent three years ago, according to the
National Aids Control Council.
Although women are physically more susceptible
to HIV infection than men, with the maleto-
female transmission risk being twice as high
as that offemale-to-male transmission, UNAids
says, other socio-economic factors have
weighed in to bring the wide gender disparity in
infections.
These include poverty, which is driving many
young women and girls to engage in risky
"transactional sex" in exchange for goods, services,
money or basic necessities - often with
older men.
"Young girls tend to have their first sexual
encounter with men who have a sexual history
going back 10 years," Ms. Bella Matabanadzo,
the United Nation's secretary-general's representative
on the Task Force on Women and
Aids told the Sunday Nation.
According to the director of Kenya's
National Aids Control Council (NACC), Dr
Patrick Orege, the risks associated with early
sexual initiation of girls by older men are frequently
compounded by lack of prevention
awareness and access to condoms.
According to the agency, another major factor
driving the Aids epidemic among women on
the continent is sexual violence.