Daily Nation/ Tuesday, August 31, 2004
Cape Town, South Africa
The high court in South Africa last week
dismissed a challenge to the country's
new drug pricing regulations, which are
aimed at bringing down medicine prices
in Africa's biggest drug market.
"The court has decided in favour of the
Minister of Health," Debbie Peatman,
chief legal director at the Department of
Health, told reporters.
The regulations will take effect immediately
and will set a maximum of 26 percent
for the retail dispensing fee that
pharmacists may charge customers.
Pharmacists' groups said the move could
drive many of them out of business.
The regulations also set a so-called "single
exit price" for drugs coming from
manufacturers, forbidding discounts and
incentive programmes that have been
offered in the past to retailers and pharmacies.
South Africa's Pharmaceutical Society,
along with retailer New Clicks and private
health care provider Netcare, had
challenged the new laws.
A majority on the three-judge panel dismissed
the contention that the government
had acted unlawfully in considering
recommendations of the department
of health's pricing committee, which it
ruled had acted fairly and within its
powers ..
Lawyers for the applicants said they
would review the judgment and decide
next week whether to lodge an appeal.
Drug prices are a particularly sensitive
subject in South Africa, which has the
world's highest caseload of HIV and
Aids with some five million people
infected.
South Africa launched its drug pricing
plan in April, saying the elimination of
manufacturer incentives and capping of
pharmacists' mark-ups would save consumers
up to 3 billion rand ($450 million)
per year.
The court challenge delayed the caps on
pharmacy fees, while the manufacturer
incentive ban was implemented quickly.
Both are fully in force following Friday's
ruling, Health Ministry officials said.
Humphrey Zokufa, the Department of
Health's director for pharmaceuticals,
said the court's ruling
would open the G h II door to better ourt c a enge health care for mil- -----------
lions of poor South delayed the cap on Africans. _
"This is not a vic- pharmacyfiees tory for the Department
of Health. ----------
This is a victory for consumers. We
know what was done over the last couple
of weeks. Consumers have been held
ransom by high prices."
Ivan Kotze, executive director of the
Pharmaceutical Society, said the fact
that the court failed to rule unanimously
against the group's complaint showed
there were still questions about the new
pricing rules. "We are disappointed, but
the split judgment shows there is merit
in our case. We will have to study the
judgment to determine what to do from
here. We still say the pharmacies will not
be able to operate their business, pay
their salaries and pay their rents," he
said. Zokufa rejected concerns from the
Pharmaceutical Society that it could take
a month to implement the regulations,
saying pharmacists should have prepared
for the ruling. "It's negligence at
best," he said.
But pharmacists appeared shocked by
Friday's judgment.
"I'm actually feeling quite sick, it's not
only affecting pharmacy owners, it's
affecting the employee ... how will we
pay our rents," Cape Town pharmacist
Natalie Geard said.
jEven as the court was
making its ruling, Glaxo-
SmithKline Pic had
granted a third voluntary
licence to a South African
generics firm to market
its anti-Aids medicines.
The firm is the world's
leading supplier of HIV/Aids drugs.
Feza Pharmaceuticals will be allowed to
manufacture, import and sell antiretrovirals
containing GSK's two patented
products zidovudine, also known
as AZT, and lamivudine, the Britishbased
company said in a statement.
Feza will initially import the drugs, but
the firm hopes to start manufacturing
them locally once it has received the
necessary clearance from regulators.
(Reuters)