Daily Nation / Wednesday, May 26, 2004

NEW ORDER IN BABY RIDDLE
COUPLE TOLD TO EXHUME BODY FOR TESTS ON PARENTAGE

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 1
not, the couple want to find their own
little child.
They told a court yesterday that it
would be only after a DNA test on
Anne’s remains that they would know
whether to begin the search — or
whether they should sue
Pumwani maternity hospital in
Nairobi for negligence in giving
infected blood.
Their application was filed at
Milimani Commercial Court by
lawyer Gilbert Onyango for the
children’s charity, The Cradle, to which
the couple turned for help.
in granting the order for exhumation,
the magistrate also gave the couple per
mission to hand over Anne’s body to the
Government if it was proved that she
was not their child. .
Eunice and Charles based their appli
cation on the ground that when the two
were tested for Aids, they were nega
live, raising questions as to how their
baby could have become infected.
The couple have gone for four differ
ent Aids tests since Anne’s death about
a year ago. They have always tested neg
ative, the court was told. The most
recent test was in February this year
when they were tested at the Kenya
Medical Research Institute.
They have gone for four Aids
According to the death certificate,
Anne died from a heart attack following
menengitis, or in medical language,
“cardiopulmonary arrest due to severe
septic anaemia due to menengitis due to
immunosuppresion.”
In her signed statement to the court,
Eunice said when she first cxprcssed
doubts about the baby’s weight, nurses
told her the weight loss was a result of
blood transfusion.
About 11 days after she gave birth,
Eunice and her baby were transferred to
Kenyatta National Hospital. On the day
of the transfer, Mrs Ndentu said she was
surprised to see Anne had burns on her
left leg, stretching from the thigh to her
toes.
“I asked the nurses what had
caused the burns but they refused
to tell me what had happened,”
tests since the death of the girl sh0 refused to give her
the medical reports or the doc.
tot’s flotes on the treatment
given to her baby on their transfer to
Kenyatta, the court heard.
It was while Anne was at KNH that
doctors told her Anne had been diag
nosed as having contracted HIV.
On February 26, last year, Anne was
discharged from KNH but one month
later — on March 27 — she was readmit
ted to KNH where she died on June 5.