Daily Nation / Thursday, June 3, 2004
The Government is concerned about the
large number of refugee children in the
country, Education minister George Saitoti
said yesterday.
"The Government has been: forced to
cater for the education of r~fugee children
when its budget can-hardly meet
the needs of its own citizens," he said.
He said the strain on resources to
financ~cation had been made worse
by the introduction of free primary education.
'
Prof Saitoti was speaki~g to the Press
in Mombasa during a three-day' ministerial
conference on education in countries
affected by conflict.
 Lady marriages
Rcfugec children are .traumatised or
havc bcen exposed to abuses which
make it difficult for them (o adjust to
ordered and disciplined environments
such as schools,” he said.
The minister said educating children
in Africa was hampered by early mar
riages. Aids, tribal clashes and insecurity
due to cattle rustling, and the problem of
street children. “Following the crisis
facing chi’dren in Atrita, laughter is a
stranger. ttmgcr and even deaths arc
Constant Companions, and abuse of
every kisd a daily OCCUrt,” he said.
Recogaising people’s cultures and
similariues among them could rcduce
conflict, he said.
Ministers or their representatives
from 23 sub-Saharari Africa are attendED THE MEETING AT WHITESANDS HOTEL.


Top scientists to discuss  Aids vaccine

More than 150 leading world scientists
and doctors meet in Switzerland from
Monday to discuss the progress of Aids
vaccine development. ,
Their aganda include the latest developments
in vaccine research and development
as well as policy and implementation
for HIV I Aids, malaria,
tuberculosis, severe acute respiratory
syndrome (Sars), influenza, measles,
rubella and meningitis.
Scientists are striving to tackle many
old and newly emerging infectious diseases
by developing new vaccines and
improving technologies and tools. ,
Newcomers in the manufacture of vaccine
are playing an ever increasing role
in the production of
medicines to immu- M t
nise the world's chil- ee ing
dren. sponsored
lmmunisation
stands out as one of by the
the greatest public WHO
health achievements _
of the 20th century,
saving millions of lives.
Smallpox was eradicated in 1979'
polio, once a global epidemic, will soo~
be eradicated; neonatal tetanus has been
eliminated from many countries; and
measles deaths have decreased by 30 per
cent globally since 1999.
The meeting is sponsored by the
World Health Organisation's Initiative
for Vaccine Research and the Global
Alliance for Vaccines and lmmunisation.
Among the issues that will be covered
in the Global Vaccine Research Forum
to be held from June 7 to 10 is; Sars: The
needs for a public health response in case
of a resurgence and the status of development
of vaccines in China, the United
States and Europe.

