Sunday Nation/ February 1, 2004
FACTS ON AIDS VIRUS AND DISCORDANT COUPLES

Among the most challenging things that can happen in a relationship is the discovery
that one of the partners has
the HIV when the other doesn't.
These so-called "discordant couples"
are surprisingly common. As Arthur Okwemba
reported in the Daily Nation recently, to to 15
per cent of couples are estimated to be discordant
at Kenyatta National Hospital vcr centre.
A testing centre in Zambia found a figure of 25
per cent.
Such couples are placed under a huge strain -
and many break up. You can understand why:
The fears; worries; stigmatisation; suspicions of
unfaithfulness; and somehow the idea has got
around that if you are infected you must have
been promiscuous. Yet many negative partners
are wonderful. They accept the fears and uncertainties.
They support their infected spouse
through all the difficulties. And they are right to.
Because the relentlessly one-track messages
we've been getting are too simplistic. Some discordant
couples have had unprotected sex .
together for many years without passing HIV
from one to the other. Yet we're constantly told
infection is practically inevitable if you have sex
with someone who is positive.
But suddenly, even the statistics are in doubt.
The recent Kenya Demographic and Health Survey
showed an infection rate of 6.7 per cent.
Over the past two years, UNAids estimates have
declined from 15 to 9.4 per cent. The UNAids
approach models total infection rates from antenatal
tests, and ~ian Malan, a South African
writer, has made himself hugely unpopular by
pointing out how inaccurate this technique can
be. For example, an estimated 9.5 per cent at
Rand Afrikaans University proved to be over
eight times too high when real tests were done.
South Africa's major banks ran HIV tests on
29,000 staff. The testing gave a result below four
per cent. The models said 12.
Not only do infection rates seem lower than we
have been led tO'believe, but in fact "normal"
sex does not seem to spread HIV all that easily.
Wherever it has been measured, including Africa,
the probability of transmission per contact
ranges from 1 in 200 to 1 in 2000 (male to
female) and 1 in tO,OOO (female to male). And
the wide variation in the probabilities tells us
that the virus doesn't have things all its own
way.
Some things do greatly increase the risk, such as
a high viral load, especially during the acute
phase of the illness and shortly after infection;
anything that results in damaged skin or mucous
membranes, like "dry sex"; other sexually transmitted
diseases, especially herpes, which is a particular
problem as many people don't know
they're infected.
But there are also many things that reduce the
chance of infection. Simple lubricants, for example,
by protecting the skin and mucous membranes.
Condoms, of course. Many investigations
have shown that males circumcised before
puberty (but not afterwards) are highly protected.
For example, in one Ugandan study, none of
the circumcised males became infected. Transmission
from circumcised males to females was
also reduced, but only for men with low viral
loads.
People whose "Human Leucocyte Antigens" do
not match are less likely to infect one another.
Ten per cent of Europeans have a mutation that
seems to inhibit HIV infection. Population
geneticists at the University of California, USA,
believe that it originally protected them against
smallpox, which was common there. It has also
been suggested that smallpox vaccination may be
protective, although this hasn't been proved yet.
Somehow it's also implied that HIV is a uniquely
African problem because there's more promiscuity
here. A dozen surveys have shown that is not
true. But you hardly ever hear about other ways of
spreading HIV, do you? And yet Dr David Gisselquist
argues that studies linking Africans' sexual
behaviour to HIV transmission account for
only a third of infections. Many infected African
adults have had no sexual exposure to HIV. Many
HIV positive children have HIV negative mothers.
Many African women become infected before and
after giving birth. What's going on?
It seems that HIV researchers during the 1980s
investigated patients at sexually transmitted disease
clinics in Africa - and never really questioned
their results. But people there were often
treated by injection. Equipment was often not
properly sterilised. And HIV can survive in
syringes at room temperature for over four weeks.
The risk of contracting HIV from a contaminated
needle has been c;stimated at up to seven per cent.
One investigation tested 80 syringes and found
HIV in three of them. Many studies now show 20
to 40 per cent of HIV infections in African adults
are associated with injections.
There is complete agreement that in North America,
Europe, and many parts of Asia, HIV is primarily
spread by contaminated needles. And by
anal intercourse - where tissue damage is common.
Why should Africa be any different?
Don't imagine that the practice is unknown in
Africa. It's just that no one speaks about it. But
it's common among some groups - both male
and female. Some women do it in order to avoid
"losing their virginity". Many because since it's
never mentioned in HIV campaigns, they think
it's safer that way!
I guess a long term discordant couple is likely to
have had all the risk factors in their favour -
maybe genetically, certainly behaviourally. Their
challenge is to keep them that way. And no one
should assume that the one who is infected has
been unfaithful.
They could have acquired the virus through no
fault of their own. Discordant couples must do
everything they can - together - to remain
healthy and prevent transmission to the negative
partner. Even those who refuse to use condoms
- and face it, many do. By using a lubricant. By
treating other sexually transmitted diseases. By
reducing viral load: anti-retroviral treatment
really works.
Above all, they should stick together, be faithful,
support and look after one another. Because in
many ways, the most terrible thing about HIV'
now is the fear and depression it causes. But
every day we learn more about the disease - and
it will be beaten. More people now understand
that we should not reject people living with the
virus. They can lead good and healthy lives and
present little risk to other people. And they may
well have been infected through no fault of their
own...
Dr Hart is a scientist and psychologist working in
Nairobi. E-mail: nyumbayangu@mac.com