Wednesday Daily Nation/ December 15, 2004

TOO FEW WOMEN LEADERS

THE PROVINCIAL ADMINISTRATION COULD USE A BOOST AT THE TOP
BY NICHOLAS OKEYA

The next time President Mwai Kibaki
summons district commissioners to
State House for a briefing, he should
ask the Secretary to the Cabinet,
Ambassador Francis Muthaura, to take
roll call.
The list would contain, among others, the names of
Mrs Anne Ng'etich (DC, Murang'a), Mrs L. Muriuki
(DC, Maragua) and Mrs Catherine Gatama
(DC, Busia). The other female name that the presi·
dent would hear is that of Mrs Jane Waikenda,
Deputy PC, Eastern Province.
How would the President react to that roll call?
Maybe by asking the Secretary to the Cabinet why
there are only
four women in
influential positions
in the provincial
administration.
Were the President
to call all
cthoempmroI.SvSin.Icoinaelrs,
it would be an
all-male affair because there is no female provincial
commissioner.
When Men for Gender Equality (MGE) called on
the Murang'a DC, Mrs Ng'etich on the seventh day
of their ten·day campaign against gender-based violence
and HIV/Aids in Central, Eastern and parts
of Rift Valley provinces, she"was thrilled to see"men
in the frontline of the fight against gender inequali·
ty.
"I'm lost of words, I wish this campaign started
immediately after independence, women would not
be a minority in decision-making positions," she
said.
"We are looking forward to a time when our numbers
shall increase both at the district and the provinciallevels
so that our voices will be heard loud
and clear," Ng'etich, who was posted to Murang'a
just over a year ago, added.
Denying women equal opportunities may be considered
another form of gender violence, said the
provincial adm inistra tor.
The MGE movement says it has identified men as
the major culprits in gender-based violence.
"Most men come from very closed cultures that still
Illicit brew
She appealed to local politicians to join hands with
her in making the area peaceful by telling men to
spend their time in meaningful activities instead of
spending the whole day idling on the streets.
Nyandarua District Officer One, Ernest Munyi,
said the rate of consumption of illicit brew had
increased in the area. ~~Ourhands are full, we have
cases of child molestation, street children, prostitution
and consumption of illicit brew," he said.
Francis Mutie, the Nakuru District Officer One,
raised the same concern. He added that gender
equality must start at the family level. "Men must
live peacefully with their wives."
Kenya is a signatory to the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms Violence against Women;
hence the need for the leadership to ensure that
national legislation is enacted or reviewed so that it
conforms to the. provisions of the Convention.
consider women as household chattels," said John
.Waweru, one of the members.
'"That is why we are targeting men regardless of
their status in life," he added .
Ng'etich said that the rate of HIV infection seemed
to be on the decline in the district, but she was seri·
ously concerned by the high rate of domestic violence.
She appealed to the men of Murang'a to
respect their wives and treat them as equal partners.
Hold the key
Men for Gender Equality have appealed to the
government to give priority to various Bills awaiting
enactment, including the Sexual Offences Bill
aimed at protecting women and girls.
The group wants more men, whom they believe
'hold the key to ending gender-based violence and
the spread of HIV/Aids, to join the campaign.
HWhen women and children are battered, raped,
murdered, abused and dehumanised while.other
men watch and keep silent, they are in effect supporting
and condoning the violence,"~one mtmner
said.