20                                                                               Daily Nation! Tuesday, June 1, 2004
 "Angel of Death Stalks the Work Place
                                                                          has responded to the pandemic in Kenya,
                                                                          majority of the companies do not discriminate on
Aids has led to                                                           Uganda, Tanzania and Zambia. It says the
                                                                          the basis of the HIV/Aids status when hiring and
an increased                                                              are mainly supportive of the HIV positive people.
                                                                          The survey was conducted in the second half of
                                                                          resource managers.
health cost for                                                           2003 through a series of interviews with human
                                                                             Participating organisations were selected at
                                                                          running HIV prevention programmes; 88 per cent
employers as                                                              random. Only half of the organisations are      .
well as robbing                                                           provide medical cover for their employees but
                                                                          almost a third exclude HIV/Aids. Conversely, 40
                                                                          per cent that provide health care explicitly state it
                                                                             The survey shows that despite publicity,
the agricultural                                                          covers HIV/Aids care.
                                                                          businesses seem to be underestimating the
sector a much                                                             impact of, and reacting slowly to HIV/Aids
                                                                          pandemic, said PWC country leader Charles
                                                                             A recent study at the University of Nairobi on
needed                                                                    MLichene.
                                                                          HIV/Aids prevalence indicates the institution loses
                                                                          student population.
workforce                                                                 two people each a week from among its staff and
                 GILBERT MOGIRE                                                The study on the impact of HIV/Aids on the
                                                                           University by Sociology lecturer Charles Nzioka,
 Since taking power, the Narc government has
                                                                           said some of the affected staff had been unable to
 always taken the fight aginst Aids very seriously. It
                                                                           discharge their duties, while the students had
  took no less than the personal drive of President
                                                                           difficulties in meeting their academic obligations.
  Kibaki to relaunch the Constituency Aids Control
                                                                               Evidence from this study shows HIV/Aids
  Committees. As a meaure of how serious the
                                                                           related illnesses had led to increased spending on
  government viewed the problem the President
                                                                           health care by both the university and its
  starred in a television commercial in which he
                                                                           members.
  appeals for Kenyans to protect themself against
                                                                           Records from the University's Savings and Credit
  the sourge. But what exactly are the social and
                                                                           Co-operative Society-Chuna and Chuna Members
  economic effects of this scourge on the country?
                                                                         . Benevolent Fund (CHEMBEFU) accounts show
      The pandemic has led to an increased health
                                                                           that university staff were using more of their loans
  cost for employers as well as robbing the
                                                                           on medical, burial and funeral related activities.
  agricultural sector a much needed workforce. It is
                                                                               The transport department at the university the
  worth noting that among those most affected by
                                                                           was reeling under strain as more of its resources
  the scourge are those within the productive age
                                                                           were expended on funerals and burial related
  bracket. Highly skilled manpower has been lost as
                                                                           activities instead of academic trips.
  a result of this pandemic.
                                                                               The study recommended urgent measuresJo
      Firms have been forced to rehire and train
                                                                           combat HIV/Aids not only at the UoN, but in all
  employees to replace. those. who have succumbed
                                                                           other public and private universities.
  to the disease. There has been no respite since
                                                                               Former University of Nairobi Vice Chancellor
  the first Aids case was reported in the country in
                                                                           Prof Francis Gichaga, started a campaign to
   1984.
                                                                           confront the epidemic in the year 2000, on
      A recent survey, IV/Aids: What is Business
                                                                           realising that HIV/Aids was increasingly taking a
   doing? . by a consultancy firm on the status of
                                                                            heavier toll on his staff and students.
, Aids policy implementation in companies gave
                                                                               The campaign sougl1t to establish voluntary
  depressing results. While many institutions have
                                                                           counselling, testing services on campus and to
  done pretty well in developing policies aimed at
                                                                            intensify the distribution of condoms.
  stemming the spread of Aids and assisting those
                                                                               The study found that some lecturers at the
   infected or affected, many such policies are hardly
                                                                            university have to take up more and more teaching
  translated into action.
                                                                           to cover for their indisposed colleagues; a
      What the survey reveals is part of a bigger
                                                                            practice that always complicated matters for some
   problem that hampers efforts towards reducing the
                                                                            departments with a large number of students.
   spread of Aids.
                                                                                In 1999, the university spent approximately
       For most companies, Aids sensitisation
                                                                            Sh7.5million and mori;l than Sh10milion in 2000 in
   campaigns are routine procedures, and so is the
                                                                            funeral and burial expenses.
   provision of protective devices like condoms. Aids
                                                                                 Another recent survey by Dr William Kiarie, a
   policies are enacted as a matter'of course and                           Kenya HIV/Aids Business Council Consultant,
   trumpeted whenever an opportunity arises. But
                                                                           titled Private Sector Anti Retroviral Treatment
   they are barely translated into action.                                 Resource Pack showed that Kenya had 1.1 milion
       For instance, few companies provide medical                       . people in formal public and private employment, of
   care for employees infected by HIV. Indeed, many
                                                                           whom 112,000 lived with HIV and 16,500 were in
   medical schemes preclude Aids, yet this is what
                                                                           need of ARVs.
    requires a lot of financial support. Nor do
                                                                              Only 30 companies of the council's 100
   organisations have counselling and support
                                                                           members offered ARVs to 300 employees, a mere
   systems .•                                                              2 per cent of the private sector workers who need
   . Workers representatives argue that currently
                                                                           treatment.
   there are alot of advocacy programmes going on
                                                                           The survey attributed employers' reluctance to
   in many companies in the country on Aids.
                                                                           start ARV treatment to stigma and discrimination,
    Whoever, they contend that talking of sensitising
                                                                           lack of effective and comprehensive work-place
    organisations to mainstream Aids policies into       Enlightenme-
                                                                           programmes and fear of high costs.
   their work systems may not amount to much. The        nt among all         After many years of procrastination, the
    challenge lies in convincing both employers and
 . employees that stemming the spread of the             age groups is     government eventually shed its attitude of see- no
                                                         the only sure     -evil, hear- no -evil and produced. Sessional Paper
 scourge requires attitudinal and behavioural
                                                                           No 4 of 1997 on Aids in Kenya which sought to
 change.                                                 way to Keep       address the threat of Aids in the labour market.
     The government for example, should also             HIVIAIDS at          It aimed to provide a policy framework within
  encourage or'ganisations to channel anti-
                                                         bay.              which Aids prev~ntion and control efforts would be
 1'etrovirals to their employees who are infected.
                                                                           undertaken for the next 15 years and beyond.
     The survey involving 216 organisations by
                                                                              Therefore even as the country is celebrating this
  PricewaterhouseCoopers       (PWC) revealed that 39
                                                                           Madaraka Day, the Aids scourge remains one of
  per cent of the firms have the policies but most
                                                                           the many challenges that impede our development
  underestimate the prevalence of the pandemic.
                                                                           pace.
 Jhe survey shows how the business community
 -
Page 


-------------------Trial Version-----------------------

Convert PDF to Text Desktop Software.

Copyright Convertpdftotext.net 2014.

To remove these lines, please activate your software from http://www.convertpdftotext.net/buynow.htm

-------------------------------------------------------
