Thursday September 2, 2004                                                                               Science / Technology / The World of Ideas
                    ·ds vaccine fails crucial test
It is disappointment as product fails to produce adequate protection
                he Aids vaccine developed in Kenya has failed to offer
                 to be short-lived.
                 protection against HIV, says the team working on the
T                project.
                    The vaccine only offered immunity to an insignifi-
                 cant percentage of volunteers, and even this was found
                    The disappointing results of the six-year study were
released on Tuesday by all the participating partners at an Aids Vac-
cine 2004 conference in Lausanne, Switzerland. -
   Although initial data indicated that the vaccine is safe and well tol-
erated among the 205 volunteers from Kenya, Uganda and the United
Kingdom, "only a quarter of these indicated they had developed some
protection against the virus, but even these responses were not long
lasting."
   Studies in Kenya and Uganda showed immune response rates not
greater than 25 per cent among the combined 86 volunteers vacci-
nated since 2001, against a 60 per cent rate considered by some vac-
cine experts asjhe benchmark.
   The project's main funders, International Aids'Vaccjne Initiative,
in a statement, say it will now complete a small number of clinical
trials that have already started over the next six to nine months.
   "Unless we see some dramatic improvement in performance we
will not develop the candidates further, and will focus on our other
research and development projects," says the statement.
    In the two remaining studies, scientists at Kenya Aids Vaccine Initi-
ative and Oxford University are going to increase the dosage of the
vaccine and administer it through different routes among the remain-'
ing volunteers to see if there will be a boost in the immune-response.
    "What we want to do is to see if an increased dosage would directly
 result in the vaccine generating more immune responses. But if after
 that we fail to see much improvement, then IAVI will terminate the
testing of this vaccine and embark on its other vaccine projects," says
 Dr Crispin Kambili.
   The vaccine candidates, scientifically known as DNA.HIV A and
 MVA.HIV A are jointly owned by the Oxford University of Britain
 and University of Nairobi in Kenya. Their development cost more
 than one billion shillings.
    The 439 study volunteers, among them 106 in Kenyans, 50 in Ugan-
 dans, and 222 British, overwhelmingly participated in various phases
 of the study whose results established the vaccine's safety when used
 in human beings.
    The volunteers, who have been monitored for over a year after vac-
 cination while being subjected to extensive medical examinations,
 have not revealed any serious side effects.
    The vaccine becomes the second Aids vaccine candidate - which
 has reached human trials- to fail. Last year, AidsVax, developed by
 VaxOen of the US, also failed to give the desired results.
    This new development has other immediate implications. IAVI's
 planned trials in the Netherlands and Rwanda, based on the Kenya
 candidate, will not go on. Recruitment of volunteers in South Africa-
 Durban and Johannesburg, and Switzerland, has also been halted.
                                             CONTINUED ON PAGE 24
          Local researchers develop Kiswahili software
     By Patrick Ngugi                                      papers or novels being read to them by a compu-      South Africa, and Ibibio of Nigeria.                through which you can speak Kiswahili io your
                                                           ter. Even children can sit around a computer and     Currently, Dr Mucemi Oakuru and Prof Freder-        computer and it converts your speech to text.
     In a few months' time you will be able to com-        listen to their favourite story books talking.       ick Kang'ethe Iraki are fine-tuning their product   The Kiswahili project took Dr Oakuru, of the
     mand your computer to read out Kiswahili text         This follows a breakthrough by two Kenyan sci-       for release into the Internet. This means anyone    Engineering Depart-
     for you.                                              entists who have developed a computer software       will be able to download it from the Internet
                                                           that can change Kiswahili text into speech.          once it has been launched. Eventually, the team                          CONTINUED ON PAGE 24
     Not only that, you could be able to receive a
     Kiswahili text message on your cellphone, but         Kiswahili also becomes the first African language    will embark on similar software for other local
     instead of reading it, you could choose to listen     to have this application. A coalition of research-   languages, starting with Oikuyu.                                                horizon@nation.co.ke
     as your phone reads it for you.                       ers are planning to develop similar applications     In the near future too, according to Prof Iraki,
      'fis means people can now listen to whole news-      for several African languages including Zulu of      the team will embark on developing a system
  ~.~"   -".----~
Page 


-------------------Trial Version-----------------------

Convert PDF to Text Desktop Software.

Copyright Convertpdftotext.net 2014.

To remove these lines, please activate your software from http://www.convertpdftotext.net/buynow.htm

-------------------------------------------------------
