                                                                                                                                                                                                                          29
Daily Nationl Thursday October 14, 2004                                                                                                                                                                                           -
Is blood transfusion dying out?                                                                                                                         blood and maintaining the bureaucracy of the National Blood Trans-
                                                                                                                                                        fusion Unit. When the full cost of repeated transfusion to maintain a
                                                                                                                                                        constant haemoglobin is taken into account, then the appropriate and
                                                                                                                                                        judicious use of intravenous Iron Sucrose and erythropoietin will not
The current blood shortage in the country will continue and even get
                                                                                                                                                        only be more effective but safer and cheaper in the long run.
worse as demand rises and donors get fewer and fewer.
  To put this into perspective, at any given day, there are about 10
patients waiting for blood transfusion at Kenyatta National Hospital's                                                                                  Safer alternatives
                                                                                                                                                        So when is blood transfusion absolutely necessary?
gynaecology ward alone.                                                                                                                                 The limited supply of blood today available in the country should be
..    ctors at the hospital say almost half of cases requiring blood
                                                                                                                                                        reserved for those patients who must get a blood transfusion to save
transfusion are either cancelled or postponed everyday because of                                                                                       their lives such as accident victims, burn victims, gun-shot victims or
 lack of blood. And it is the same in all public hospitals across the
                                                                                                                                                      those admitted to hospitals with severe anaemia but require other
 country.                                                                                                                                             blood components too.
    Patients have to stay in the wards for longer than necessary because
                                                                                                                                                          The use of safer alternatives for blood transfusion can be used for a
 blood for transfusion is not commonly available. The blood transfu-
                                                                                                                                                      larger group of patients, about 70 per cent, and thus avoid blood
 sion unit receives about 566 requests for transfusion every week but
                                                                                                                                                       transfusion. By doing so, this would ensure that the blood bank has
 only 300 units are donated per week. Thus, in one month the hospital            Preparing a patient for surgery                                       enough blood reserves in case of a major catastrophe such as the
 requires 2,264 units of blood to meet the needs of the service provid-
                                                                                                                                                       August 1998 bomb blast and the day to day road accidents.
 er. The blood transfusion unit is only able to issue 260 units of blood         single life-threatening incident. The alternatives to transfusionare     Debate on whether blood transfusion has a future has been ongo-
  per week, thus covering only 50 per cent of the requirement.                   often seen as impossibly expensive, after all blood is given freely.    ing. It is generally agreed that it has but only in the medium term.
    The department of obstetrics and gynaecology alone puts in 150                  What is not always appreciated is the huge cost of processing the
  requests for blood. Out of this only 60 units are provided and these
  are for the most needy of the cases.
  Armed Forces
  But this, says Dr Njoroge Gichuhi, head of department of obstetrics
  and gynecology at the hospital, can only get"worse because the blood
  catchment areas are becoming fewer. Traditionally blood donation is
  not a very popular event in Kenya. Now with the advent of HIV, this
  problem has been further compounded.
      The Armed Forces and the prisons had been the main sources of
  blood in most parts of this country. The result of all this has been a
  drastic reduction of the blood donor pool. Says Dr Njoroge Gichuhi:
  "That means patients die because of postponed operations rather
   than lack of blood. In this case their relatives are usually unable to
   link blood scarcity with the deaths."
    , To save lives and counter the dwindling blood donation levels,
    medical experts call for a radical, urgent and decisive action on the
    part of both the government and the private sector.
       The advent of HlV/Aids has also had a negative response from
    recipients of blood. Even in the US, considered to have the safest
    blood supply, opinion surveys have it that a full one-third of the pub-
    lic disagrees with official statements that "the blood supply is safe"
    and that they would agree to accept blood transfusion if hospitalized."
      The lack of enough blood in the banks, doubts over its safety and
    other clinical complications that could arise from a transfusion have
    kept up the search for ways to eliminate blood transfusions.
       "It is not as if we have reached a cul-de-sac, there are several appli-
    cable and already tried alternatives to whole blood transfusions, but
    these must be adopted sooner than later," says a senior gynaecologist
    at KNH.
    Bloodless medicine
    One area that has been identified as a possible candidate for newer
    technologies in 'bloodless medicine' is anaemia
          Anemia is one of the major causes of admission or prolonged hos-
    pital stay which impact on hospital bills. Anemia occurs when the
    body isn't able to produce enough healthy red blood cells.
          This can happen because of a deficiency of iron or certain other
     substances in the body or from inherited defects or diseases that inter-
     fere with the production of red blood cells
          Iron is essential for the production of hemoglobin in red blood
     cells. Poor dietary iron intake (or excessive loss of iron from the
     body) leads to iron-deficiency anemia.
           Blood loss such as that associated with schistosomiasis, hookworm
      infestation, hemorrhage in childbirth and trauma can also result in
      both iron deficiency and anemia.
           There is now a greater awareness of the importance of preventing
      and treating anemia especially that related to iron-deficiency. ,New
       research suggests that this deficiency can be corrected with oral iron
       therapy, which is relatively safe and inexpensive.
           However, for severe anaemia, blood transfusion has been the only
       way to correct the situation. But emerging issues of availability and
       safety of blood, points to a need to reduce blood transfusion. Diseases
        that can be transmitted through blood include HlV, hepatitis A, B,
        and C and malaria among others.
            Clinicians now know that it is possible to help the body compensate
        for blood loss during surgery without the use of donor blood. For
        example, a number of approved pharmaceutical agents are used to
         treat or prevent anaemia. These mainly include parenteral iron and
         erythropoietin, which are typically used prior to surgery.t0 stimulate
              bone marrow's production of red blood cells. These same agents
           a be used after surgery to rebuild the red blood mass.
            Using the experience gained in renal medicine, it is now possible to
          produce increased numbers of the patient's own red cells across sur-
          gery, during chemotherapy,        after chronic blood loss and in
          immunosupression.
       Intravenous iron
       For those patients who for one reason or another have decided not to
           Experience has shown that planned surgery and anaemia that may
       receive any blood transfusion, the use of a safe intravenous iron and                                                                                                                                                          -
       recombinant human erythropoietin has proved to be very successful.
        arise due to blood loss can be dealt with effectively by stimulating the
        production of red cells prior to or after surgery. Severe anaemia too
        can be treated with safe intravenous iron.                                                                                                                                                                                    •
            Intravenous iron has always been treated as potentially dangerous
        to the body. Many clinicia!ls will recall having being told that intrave-
        nous iron is potentially dangerous. This is no longer true now that
        intravenous iron sucrose rather than iron dextran is used. It was Dex-
         tran in the old preparations that used to cause the dramatic anaphy-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      •
         lactic shock.
            Dr Ivor Cavill, senior lecturer, University of Wales medical school,
         cites cases where intravenous iron sucrose has been used widely and
         successfully in the Western world for more than 20 years without a
Page 


-------------------Trial Version-----------------------

Convert PDF to Text Desktop Software.

Copyright Convertpdftotext.net 2014.

To remove these lines, please activate your software from http://www.convertpdftotext.net/buynow.htm

-------------------------------------------------------
