     Thursday July 22, 2004                                                                                        Science / Technology / The World of Ideas
     Girl, 19, lights up rural villages
     Roseline Wambui has
     modified household
     electrical appliances to
     use ordinary batteries
     By Mwangi Ndirangu
                         19-year-old giri in Nyeri has found a practical solu-
                         from car (or solar powered) batteries - innovations
                         tion to rural electrification and she is already mak-
     A                   ing a tidy sum of money for herself.
                            Roseline Wambui has modified several household
                         electronic appliances to conveniently source power
     that are now fighting for space in major electronics shops in Embu,
     Meru, Embu, Nyahururu, Nanyuki and Nyeri.
        The modifications enable appliances specified to use alternating
     current (AC) to be used with direct current (DC).
     However, Wambui is reluctant to go into details on her modification
     procedure lest "a competitor steals her idea" .
..       One of her popular modifications is the the electronic iron box
     which she and her father buy and modify to use battery power. They
     sell the same for Sh 1,000, making a profit of between Sh 200 and 300
     per piece. In the last few months she has sold about 400 pieces.
         A beneficiary of Wambui's innovation, Mr Francis Gichuki, says
     his family can now conveniently afford to bathe in warm water during
     this cold season after obtaining a modified water heater.
         "My solar battery can store energy for up to four days and the
     heater assists in boiling cooking water, thus saving on the scarce wood
     fuel," he says.
         Mr Gichuki added that though they border the Aberdare forest,
     wood fuel has become rare since the government imposed restrictions
     on tree felling..
                                               The father of two, who hails
                                          . from Kieni Division, says the
     She has                                immersion water heater and the
                                            modified solar powered iron box
                                            Bellevue village.
     already sold                           have also benefited residents of
                                               "Women from our village who
     about 400                              have previously been using char-
                                            coal iron boxes flock to our home
     iron boxes                             on Sunday to iron their clothes,"
                                            says Mr Githuki who works with a
                                            leading petroleum company in
                                            Nairobi.
         He says he installed solar panels to light his home but he still con-
      tinued to use a charcoal iron box until early this year when he found
      the modified iron box in one of the electronics shop in Nyeri town.
         Mr Gichuki says the modified appliances came at the right' time
      when many rural people are embracing solar power as a source of
      energy.
         "It will take many decades for people like us living in the interior to .
      get electricity and Wambui's innovation comes in handy since we now
      enjoy most of the services available in urban areas," he says.
         Salesmen at one of the leading electronics shops in Nyeri town said
      the modified appliances are very popular with rural residents. "We                                                                                                                                              Photos/Martin Telewa
                                                                                     Roseline Wambui demonstrates to a customer how her modified immersion water heater works at a shop in Nyeri where
                                                    CONTINUED ON PAGE 32             she supplies her appliances.
      Call for mass HIVtesting at all public hospitals
     By Arthur Okwemba                                                               dential, as the disease will be treated like any other. This option is cur-   ing.done. If he or she refuses, then he or she cannot be forced to do it.
                                                                                     rently practised, especially in prenatal clinics, and only avoided if the     But they can be required to provide some explanation for a refusal.
     Health experts now want anybody seeking treatment in a health cen-              woman says she does not want to be tested. It is referred to as the           It is argued that this approach would accelerate HIV/Aids prevention
     tre or hospital to undergo an HIV test.'                            ,           Unlinked Anonymous Test.                  .                                   programmes, and reduce the amount of time and money spent in
     In a major shift from the current voluntary HIV testing, health pro-            If Kenya adopts the model, then it will mean that when a person
     fessionals at the just-concluded Aids conference in Bangkok want                walks into a hospital or health centre, what the nurse or doctor needs                                                    CONTINUED ON PAGE 32
     HIV considered just like any other disease on which tests are done on           to do is just to inform him or her that he would like to carry out an
     a routine basis.                                                                HIV test, the way it is done when screening a person of other diseases.                                                        horizon@nation.co.ke
                                                                                     If the person agrees to the test, brief counselling is given' and the test-
     If this is adopted, results of the test would not necessarily be confi-
Page 


-------------------Trial Version-----------------------

Convert PDF to Text Desktop Software.

Copyright Convertpdftotext.net 2014.

To remove these lines, please activate your software from http://www.convertpdftotext.net/buynow.htm

-------------------------------------------------------
