Daily Nation! Wednesday, May 19, 2004                                                                43
 EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY
 The United States Embassy - Centers for Disease Control
 (CDq      Kenya has a vacancy in Nairobi for a Technical
 Advisor (HIV). The incumbent of the position will lead
 and supervise all HIV/AIDS care work for CDC Kenya at
 selected delivery and study sites. Supervisory duties include
 the supervision of a multicultural team implementing care
 activities and working with partners agencies and groups.
 Technical duties include leading efforts to ensure care
 activities are based on the latest relevant science. and that
 scientific knowledge is translated into program guidelines and
 practices for both 01 prophylaxis and ARV use. Strategic
 Planning duties include representating     CDC Kenya at the
 highest levels. including donor meetings and meeting of
 technical strategy and policy groups.
 Requirements:      Medical qualification (United States MD or
 equivalent). Three years of specialist experience in the clinical
 management of HIV/AIDS. including experience with the use
 of highly active antiretroviral     therapy (HMRT)       and 01
 prophylaxis. Three years of medical and public health
 experience in developing countries. with an emphasis on
 HIV/AIDS. sexually transmitted       infections. or reproductive
 health. Must be able to produce written reports and use
 spreadsheets and data base software packages. Annual salary
 inclusive of allowances is Kshs. 2.138.375.00.
  Those fulfilling the requirements    should submit their
  application together with a detailed CV and all relevant
  attachments via mail before May 28, 2004 to the following
  address:
                  Human Resources Office
            Public Health Professional Positions
                        P.O. Box 606
                       Village Market
                   00621 Nairobi, Kenya
                                           ~BD
    CLINICAL    SUPPORT SPECIALIST          - EAST AFRICA
               Injection Safety & Medical Devices
  SD is a world leader in medical technology with an
  enviable reputation for product innovation and quality
  in support of our mission of Helping All People Lead
  Health Lives.
   We now have a unique opportunity for a Clinical
   Support Specialist to be based at our offices in
   Nairobi with the responsibility to prepare and present
   clinical "best practice" education and clinically
   orientated but commercially focused product training
   for our customers through out East Africa. This is
   with the objective      of creating      value-added
   partnerships with our health care customers.
   Key requirements for this challenging position
   include:
   • Professional nursing/clinical education (MD
       preferred)
   • More than 5 years experience in healthcare
       including both clinical and sales/marketing roles
   • Proven experience in developing and delivering
       clinical training and education programs
   • Product marketing skills and business acumen
   • Excellent English language essential, French
       desirable
   Applications enclosing a detailed CV and copies of
   certificates are to be addressed to:
                    The General Manager
                       POBox 76613
                        Nairobi 00508
                            Kenya
   Closing Date: 31st May 2004
                                                                       . Please call: 32088660-9
          Reliable news for you and 3.5 million others daily         E...
                                                                       mail: adcentre@nation.co.ke
Page 


-------------------Trial Version-----------------------

Convert PDF to Text Desktop Software.

Copyright Convertpdftotext.net 2014.

To remove these lines, please activate your software from http://www.convertpdftotext.net/buynow.htm

-------------------------------------------------------
