DAILY NATION                                                                                                     17
Tuesday March 10, 2009
 In marking and celebrating the International Women’s Day, 8th March, whose theme is Unite To End
 Violence Against Women, the Kenya Young Women’s Christian Association renews her resolve, efforts
 and commitment to the advancement and protection of the rights of women and girls. The YWCA of
 Kenya of Kenya undertakes its activities through the following thematic areas; Social Empowerment,
 Economic Empowerment, Health, HIV and AIDS and Justice and Peace and Human Rights.
 The Kenya YWCA works through a network of seven regional branches spread all over Kenya. We
 are affiliated to the World YWCA, which is a global women’s movement that brings together National
 Associations in 125 countries. Based on its belief in Jesus Christ, the Young Women’s Christian
 Association exists to develop the leadership and collective power of women and girls to achieve
 social and economic empowerment, human rights, health security, dignity, freedom, justice and peace
 for all humanity.
 The project on “Practice Reduction and Awareness Building on Female Genital Mutilation” targets the
 Maasai, Meru and Kisii communities in Kenya through education, documentation and prevention and
 protection of girls who are at risk of forced circumcision. The project promotes the rights of the girl child
 and advocates against sexual and gender based violence
 The YWCA through this project has so far trained 435 girls who have opted for the Alternative Rights
 of Passage. The project has also ensured the successful training of over 450 Trainer of Trainers from
 a set target group composing of parents, boys, girls, opinion leaders and elders among these three
 communities. Through this project, the Kenya YWCA has also built girls rescue centres in Meru and
 Kisii. Plans are underway for a similar facility in Kajiado. Training in business skills and counseling has
 been given to 90 former circumcisers.
 The Association places education and career choice at the centre of Alternative Rites of Passage.
 Girls who undergo Alternative Rites of Passage are mentored into career options, thus widening
 their scope in life.
 The Kenya YWCA works in collaboration with the Government through provincial and district offices,
 churches, women and youth serving organizations. We appeal to health workers to join in the efforts
 to reduce Female Genital Mutilation to avoid medicalization of the practice.
 YWCA commends the government for its effort in sustaining the fight against Female Genital
 Mutilation.
Page 


-------------------Trial Version-----------------------

Convert PDF to Text Desktop Software.

Copyright Convertpdftotext.net 2014.

To remove these lines, please activate your software from http://www.convertpdftotext.net/buynow.htm

-------------------------------------------------------
