5-Nov-03
FIGHTING HIV WITH A COMPASSION
Lucy wants to be a
mother figure for
those who've been
touched by Aids

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 1
spouse be taken to court and jailed for abetting
"murder".
It was at this function, held earlier this year, that
Kenyans first saw Lucy stamp her weighty presence
in the fighting against HIV/Aids. Since then, she
has actively led various national and international
campaigns against the epidemic ..
Yet this is not a new cause she has taken up.
,Even before she became First Lady, Lucy was qui-
etly involved in projects related to the anti-Aids
campaign.
"I assist orphanages directly and indirectly. For a
long time 1 have been involved in the campaign in a
quiet way as 1 am not the ki~d of person who shows
off every time 1give donations."
She has held Christmas parties for orphans in her ,
Muthaiga home and assisted Aids orphans in vari-
olis homes; including Nyumbani Children's Home.
She has seen several orphans through college and
university and is paying school fees for others.
Her mission, she has declared, is to provide a
mother figure for those infected or touched in one
way or another by Aids, especially women and chil-
dren, who are most affected by the pandemic.
"I am a mother to everyone, including widows,
widowers and orphans. Any time you need any-
thing, just call me."

Every public function
Since the VCT visit, she has talked about Aids at
every public function she has attended, and Ken-
yans are opening up to her in her new role.
At a National Council of Women in Kenya fUnc-
tion last week, women and children told her their,
expectations ..
The children, who were from Mathare slums,
sang and recited poems about their predicament as
Aids orphans. Since they do not have parents, they
said, they wanted Lucy to allow them to call her
"Mama".
"After our parents die of Aids, we go to our aunt
who makes us beasts of burden and the neighbours
refuse to give us shelter. How happy we are now
that we have a caring mother."                    ,
As she listened to them, Lucy shed tears of sad-
ness. She was similarly moved to tears (as were
other first ladies present) was when Joan Nyambu-
ra, a widow living with Aids, narrated her experi-
ence at the Organisation of First Ladies Against
Aids satellite conference during the recent Interna-
tional Conference On Aids and Sexually Transmit-
ted Il)ness in Africa (ICASA) in Nairobi.
. Mrs Kibaki accepted a request to be the first


patron of the 39-year-old National Council of

Women in Kenya. It means she will serve as patron
to 100 Non-Governmental Organisations and 1,000

community-based organisations, which are mem-

bers of the council.

Having joined the organisation in 1970, the First
Lady knows the challenging work ahead. As the

patron, she will be expected to represent the organ

sation at international forums, but what is more

important is her duty to voice the concerns of
women at the highest office.
"Her being a patron is, for us, having someone
associated'with our [the women's] aspirations," says
East African MP Rose Waruhiu. "It is a burden but
we know the burden has landed on caring shoul-
ders."
The First Lady is happy with her new role as this
will complement her other duties of uplifting the
lives of Aids orphans and people living with Aids.
Aids is an economic disease and poverty has a
woman's face. The NCWK's vision of economically
empowering women will go a long way to combat
the disease.
"I recommend the organisation for its campaign
against domestic violence and harmful traditional
practices like wife inheritance, which expose   -
women to HIV/Aids."

Across the board
Lucy's role in the campaing against Aids is appreci-
ated across the board.
"She is like a flower. For a long time Kenyans
knew that we were losing 700 people to Aids daily
but nobody bothered. Our dear lady has shown sen-
sitivity and given us new hope," says nominated MP
Betty Tett.
For the battle against Aids to succeed, says Lucy,
Kenyans must be ready to help her by talking about
the disease at the family table, at the pulpit, in the
media and at all gatherings, including funerals and
weddings. This, she says, will curb the spread of the
pandemic.
She has declared that she wants medical therapy
for those who haves Aids to prolong their lives so
that they can live long enough to take care of their
children.


i-         With the First Lady's commitment to the cause of

those affected and infected by HIV/Aids, Kenya

may just be on the right track to winning the colos-
sal battle ahead.
