DAILY NATION OCTOBER 29, 2003

AMANI COUNSELLORS
How do I tellmy family that I ~ave HIV?
Dear A'mani,
I am a single mother working as a senior officer
in a government institution. I recently found
out that I am mv-positive. Although I had suspectedit
all along because of my frequent visits
to hospital, the news was devastating.
My family holds me in very high esteem
because I am one of the more stable members in
the family. My nine-year-old daughter and I are
very close. What is most worrying is how I will
break the news to my daughter. What will happen
to her when ~am gone'? My father is old and
sickly. Will he be able to handle the news'?
Maybe I should just keep it to myself and die
qnietly. But I'm so lonely and confused. At my
age and with my status, I ought to face reality.
But this kind of reality is too much to handle.
Please help me find some sanity and a way to
deal with it.
Amani: It must have taken a lot of courage for
you to write to us about this overwhe'1ming experience.
As you have rightly put it, even though
you were suspicious, it has shaken you thoroughly.
You are surrounded by loving people and you
do not know how to break such painful news to
them. Yet you realise you cannot live with it
alone. Sooner or later they wil1guess or know.
Your worries about your daughter's ability to
handle such news and her welfare in future are
justified; Although you have not stated it, you
mig'nt also be worried about your job and the
financial implications of your il1ness.
News about HIV is not just about sickness, but
also helplessness, hopelessness, pain, possible
- rejection arid facing one's own death. When that
kind of reality dawns on one, confusion, shock,
bitterness and anger are some of the immediate
reactions.
HIV/Aids kills very slowly, but surely, a reality
that is too much for any normal person to handle.
That is why many people choose to deny it or
ignore it until the syndrome gets the better of
them. Our brains are wired in such a way that
they can handle a certain amount pain, threat or
challenge. But when any of these is too much for
the brain, we activate defence mechanisms to
help us move on. One of these is suppression or
dissociation so that it is no longer in our conscious
mind. However, it will continue to disturb
us and inhibit our functioning in life. In other
words, one may push it to the back of the mind
untilit is too late.
Having accepted your HIV positive status this
early is very good for you because you wil1be
able to address the many issues surrounding this
fact. You have raised a number of these in your
letter. You come from a close-knit family where
members are interested in each others' welfare.
No wonder you are devastated by the complexity
of your problem and dilemma. You want them to
know but you fear the effect the news will have
on them, especially your father and daughter.
Youalso seem to understand the implications of
your HIV-status and the progress of the-disease.
However, from your letter, you seem to be more
concerned about your loved ones than yourself.
That'is not unusual.
It is important for you to accept that your ill-
ness has no cure and that it attacks your immune 'I
system so that your body is unable to fight dis- I
ease. However, it is also important for you to I
know that you can live for a very long time after
you are inJected. This will depend on hew you
handle yourself, your family and people at your
place of work. Unlike in the past, today we have
many support systems for people living with -
not dying from - Aids. You do not have to
struggle alone.
You sound like a very strong and influential
person. Being educated, you can keep yourself
informed about the disease and monitor your
own progress.
Support system
Secondly, your family closeness is a strong asset
in building an understanding and loving support
system. You can even discuss the future of your
daughter with them. Thirdly, you have an
opportunity to organise your finances and ensure
that all your possible benefits are put in place. [
think you have a lot going for you.
Following are some practical steps you might
want to take to move forward:
-Break the silence by sharing news of your HIVstatus
with a close friend or relative, in strict confidence.
At the moment, it sounds like only your
doctor is aware. You can discuss with him/her
how to go about this.
.Depending on your health and your daughter's
perception of it, you need to decide on when and
how to break the news to her. Whatever the case,
it is best that you do it yourself, because she
needs to have a lot of reassurance. If other peomarried
pie break the news to her, it might devastate her.
.Although it is not easy to be positive in your
attitude to the issues surrounding your il1ness, if
you can, join a support group where you can
learn to share with others experiences of your
struggles at each stage of the disease. Such a
group wil1empower you and even encourage you
because you will meet others who are in worse
situations than you.
• Depending on how you relate with members of
your family, discuss with one of them how to
break the news to your father and the rest of the
family. These are the ones who will walk with
you all the way.
.If and when it becomes necessary, you will need
to disclose your HIV status to the relevant person
in your place of work. This has to be done
very cautiously. I.• Continue with your normal life for as long as
I you are able to.
.Tak.e.care of you: health by eating properly and
exercISIng appropnately.
.Discuss with your doctor the right antiretroviral
drugs for your case and use them.
All this may be easier said than done. If it
b~comes difficu!t.for you to take a step, you
mIght want to VISIta professional counsellor who
can speak with you in confidence and facilitate
your progress in making the various decisions
that you need to make and support you as you
take the various measures.
Amani counsellors, Tel:602672/3, POBox 41738,
00100, Nairobi, accti@wananchi.com