Daily Nation! October 15, 2003 Wednesday

PROSTITUTES IN SEARCH FOR FUN AND LOVE
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 1
Fertile ground ,,-,C
Discos do indeed 'llppeartO be'a fertile ground to
seek a marrillge partner: That is why David amal-
10,18, goes to Kimwa disco yvery Wedm;sday. He
hopes to meet his future.~ife here. His friend married
a girl from Kimwa twp:-years ago and they are
doing well as a family. The woman is hard-working
and, amalia believes, had had all the fun that life
offers so she will never go back to discos or prostitution.
"Some of these girls you see here want to settle
down. They do this out of desperation. They are
looking for money to help their families. They are
not born prostitutes."
In his quest for a wife, amalia has had relations
with six girls in the last year but has yet to find one
willing to settle down. When he gets one, he says,
he will not ask her to go for an HIV IAids test
because it would mean having one done himself,
yet .he fears knowing his HIV status.
,The management of Octopus Disco has taken a
practical approach to the problem, and has
installedcondom dispensers in their washrooms.
These serves people likelike 17-year-old Triza just
fine: she dashes to the washroom to pick some up
when she strikes a deal with a man.Unfortunately,
experience has shown her that men are not keen on
using them. "
After an hour of dancing at Donna discotheque,
she 'once left with a man she had met on the dance
floor. They agreed that he would p~y her Sh600 for
two hours of passion but after lockmg the hotel
room he discarded the agreement and they had sex
without condoms. When he was through, he
~howed her the door and paid her nothing.
~ltl),ough she felt used, she could not report to the
,) police for fear of being arrested.
"My boyfriend gives me company and these men
-- who talk to me love me. It is good to be loved.
When I go out with them, I feel special and I enjoy
that time immensely." -
Christine, who is much better dressed than the
other prostitutes in the vicinity, seeks men out
purely for sexual pleasure. Every Wednesday, she
moves from one disco to another in search of one.
Christine dropped out of school in Form Two
three years ago. Her parents, who are financially
stable, set up a beauty and hair salon business for
her in Kisumu town. She makes good money and
has no responsibilities. She is candid about why she
prostitutes herself:
"I need a man once in a while. I cOme here to
meet one, and an extra coin in the ppcket is not
bad. You see, when you are a prostitute you really
get addicted to it."
She hopes one of her clients will make her a marriage
proposal. She has a friend who got a husband
in the same way and is now raising a family.
And she will not goto hospital because she
believes unprotected sex inevitably leads t<:>HIV
infection so "there is no point of going to h?spital
as there is no cure for Aids".
Other young people engage in prostitutiqn
because it gives them a sense of power. They move
from one Kisumu disco to another, biding their
time. As the night wears off and the moneyed men
go home, ,the prostitutes reduce their charges and .
then we can afford to take them," says the19-year-
old Kevin, a Form Four schoolleaver.
He frequented discos while in school and got
hooked to prostitutes. He has no girlfriend, saying
that girls make unrealistic demands on men and
insist on marriage after just one meeting.
"It is easier with prostitutes. Girlfriends are so
complicated but with a prostitute, you don't have to
tell her your name and it is not important that you
know hers. No attachment. And that is what I like."
Like his friends, Kevin cannot afford to take a
prostitute to a hotel, so they use nearby dark '
streets. But they have to dodge the guards in the
area. Whil,~they sometimes do use condoms they
don't seem to be overly concerned about ha~ing
unprotected sex.
While many prostitutes have been driven intG
the trade by poverty and lack of guidance fromthe
adults in their lives, others are forced into the trade
by their mothe~ or guardians. A young girl nar- ,_
rates how her mother took her away from her job .
as a househelp and hooked her up with a prostitute
from her home in Kombewa.
"My mother insists that I give her as much
money as 'my trainer' gives her mother. Sometimes
I make up t.oSh2,OOOa night and when I give her
some of thISmoney,'she is very happy and asks me
to work harder."
.~ut sometimes bu~iness is so bad that they are
~llhng to have sexWItha guard for as little as Sh20
Just to get bus fare home.
*,!ames have been changed to conceal identity