Wednesday DAILY Nation February 12, 2003

Giving refUge to youngsters That nobody else will have
Wedding bells ring
for clucky lo've birds
BANGKOK, Tuesday
By FREDERICK OPETE

Seven kilometres from Khayega township, on the
Kisumu-Kakamega highway, a nurse lingers
between the beds in the children's sickroom.
The Malaika Children's Home at Shamusinjiri
Village, in lkolomani, Kakamega District, is not a
hospital. But it has had to make provision for its
sick because in its midst are some 16 orphans who
are infected with the Aids virus.
The home, which takes in children shunned by
society provides shelter and comfort for the homeless.
There are II children in pre-primary school, 7X
in primary, 13 in secondary and two who are waiting
to join university.
The nurse manages the sickroom, but the healthcare
burden is heavier than the institution can bear.
Lucas Shitekha, the home's chairman, says he
had thought of sending the HIV positive Aids
orphans to a home in Nairobi so they could receive
better care, but the same guardians who would not
care for them refused, arguing that they would not
'want the children buried so far away from ,home. It
is against the local custom.
As he grapples with the problems at the home,
Shitekha fears about the risk of olcler infected children
infecting the younger, uninfec:ted ones. For
the ones the home is able to put through school,
, there is hope and promise.
Seth Shikuri, 19, is preparing to join Moi University
to study Electrical and Communication Engineering.
Right now, he is taking an abridging couse
in physics in preparation for the engineering programme.
His entry to the university is a dream come true
for Shikuri, whose family could not afford to send
him to school. He was rescued by the Malaika Children's
Home, which sponsored his education right
through secondary school.
Joan Khabakali Mulindi, also from a destitute
family, is another beneficiary of the Malaika Children's
Home.
Mulindi scored an A-minus in the Kenya Certificate
of Secondary Examination, and is waiting to
join university for a medicine or.computer science
course. She is currently taking computer lessons in
Nairobi.
Jackline Mutobo recently completed a nursing
course at the Mukumu Mission Hospital. She, too,
comes from the home, which has paid for her education
from primary through secondary school and
nursing college. Mutobo offers p&rt-time nursing
services at the institution while she waits for the
outcome of her interview at the Mukumu Hospital.
Established in 199Xto provide shelter, care and
education for 150 needy children and young people,
the horne is trying to venture into'unfamiliar territory.
The initial construction and general maintenance
of the children for the first four years was
funded by Ushirikiano wa Afrika na Ujerumani, a
German charitable organisation with projects in
East Africa. When the funding ended in December,
2001, and the administrators are now expected to
involve the community in sustaining the activities of
the project.


MARRYING EARLY TO RAISE KIN
YOUTHS ORPHANED BY AIDS BEING SUCKED INTO HASTY UNIONS

couple," says a community worker from the Rural Education and ~
Economic Enhancement Programme (REEP). I
Although the local Luhya community, as well as many others, tra- .'
ditionally encouraged early marriage, what is happening in Busia'~, 
1 Butula Division is unusual, says REEP coordinator Mary Makokha.
"'Young people are being forced into marriage after their parents
die of Aids-related ailments,',' she says.
National Aids Control Council figures place Busia District among
the areas worst hit by the scourge. It is estimated that three in every
10 people in the district are infected with the Aids virus.
Young women between 15 and 25 years are the most vulnerable.
They lack proper information on Aids and how to avoid contracting
it. Young and old men are constantly trying to lure girls into risky
sexual relations.
Poverty is also fanning the problem. Many people eat just one
meal in a day, and young women are bein!~pushed out of home to try
to earn 11 living as commerci<'J1sex workers. Their earnings go to support
their siblings. Still others choose the route of early marriage
believing it is safer, but there are no guarantees.
Makokha's organisation has started a loan scheme to help young
people set up small businesses. It also runs Aids training sessions on
prevention strategies.
She sees the initiative as good, but "there is still work to be done
on sensitisation". Anthony says if someone paid school fees for
him, he would not mind going back to school even if it meant attending
evening classes .

An Association of Media Women in Kenya (Amwik) feature
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 1