Daily Nationl December 3, 2003
EVEN THE DEVIL HAS GOT TO LOVE ME
SHE IS POSITIVE, BUT KAMUNDE'S SPIRITS ARE HER KEY TO GOOD HEALTH 

Jane Kamunde is so positive about her HIV
status that even the devil cannot stand in
her way.
"Even the devil has to love me," she
declares.
So full of life is she in her striking blue African
outfit that it is difficult to imagine, even for a sec-
ond, that Kamunde is HIV-positive. Not even her
eyes betray her status, so full of sparkle are they.
She has the most contagious smile, and she is a lot
of fun to talk to.
Kamunde was a ray of sunshine for the hundreds
of people living with HIV who were at Charter Hall
in Nairobi in August.
While delegates from all over the world were dis-
cussing problems related to HIV/Aids at the Keny-
atta International Conference (KICC) during the
International Conference on Aids and Sexually
Transmitted Diseases (Icasa) in August, Kamunde
was bringing hope to people living with the virus.
Hundreds of people living with HIV/Aids were in
Nairobi, hoping to make a statement with their
presence at the international conference, but they
had a more pressing problem - their failing health,
which would not allow many of them to
participate fully in what was going on at KICC. But
at Charter Hall they found help, in the form of
medical and medical and para-medical facilities that
enabled them to cope with the vigours of the one-
week conference.
Kamunde contracted the disease in 2001, and she
was there to tell her story to inspire those who were
suffering.
"When my sick husband was diagnosed HIV-
positive, I, too, wanted to know my status. What
had to happen happened, and I immediately started
going forcounselling."
Main house
Kamunde's in-laws showed no sympathy. She and
her family were kicked out of the family house,
where she has been living since her wedding. They
were given the servant's quarters, far from the main

house, with only their personal items and cooking
utensils. Even Kamunde's three children, who are

HIV-free, were not spared.

"As if kicking us out was not enough, they

warned us never to set foot in the main house

again."

One day when Kamunde went to seek help at the

main house in an emergency, she was horrified by

her brother-in-Iaw's reaction.

"What do you want now? You want to spread

your disease to the whole family? Get out," he

yelled. Kamunde was so distraught and furious that

she became a rebel with a good cause from that

day.

"I said to myself, even the devil will have to
change his mind and love me for what I am."

However, had it not been for her sister and.one

very good friend, it would have been difficult for
her and her family to survive as her husband had to

stop work by then.
"When I could not cope with my very sick hus-

band, with my own health and my three growing
children, my friend would take us all in her house
and care for us. I believe in God and God is always

listening to my prayers."
Having no job, a sick husband and three children

was a big challenge for Kamunde.

"Stigma? What stigma?" she asks. "We are our

own stigmas and we must undo that. We have so

many things to unlearn."

Kamunde believes that once a person accepts his

or her HIV status·and decides to live a normal life,

the rest becomes very easy. And she kept on saying:

"Even the Devil will end up loving you."

When Kamunde's husband died, she was ordered

out of the servant's quarter.

"Of course I refused to go. I have lived with my

husband for 20 years. I have cared for my family

and my in-laws before my HIV status. I will leave
only when I am ready and not because I am being

ordered. I have rights."

"I am in such high spirits that I don't even take
anti-retrovirals. I believe in the Lord. I am on a bal-

anced diet. I am on herbal medicine and whenever I
catch an opporturiistic disease I go for treatment.

Sometimes I have spinal pains but I am being

treated for that."
Kamunde's status has made of her not only a

rebel, but a great social worker as well. She is
actively involved with Pathfinder International,

Population Services International (PSI). Kamunde

has been trained in home-based nursing skills and

she is now passing on these skills on to other people.



Low esteem


"Because of my status, I get tired very quickly, so I

prefer to train others to do the job."
Although she is very committed to her work in

the different Non Governmental Organisations

(NGOs), she holds NGO heads in low esteem.

"I do not trust them at all. They are making

money from our plight. They should give us comfort
and not use our HIV status to enrich themselves.

We are the widows, orphans, mothers and the wives

of the millions of people living with HIV and Aids.
We know best. I am the one who had to bear the

brunt of going public about my status. So why can't
we be the coordinators? Why can't we be the advis-
advisers?
Why can't we get paid?"
Talking about her friends who have died of Aidsrelated
illnesses, Kamunde says: "I have shed many
tears but life goes on. I am so positive about being
HIV-positive that I hope I will be the first person in
the world to take the drug or vaccine that will be
invented to cure us. I keep telling my friends 'do
not die, wait for the drug.' But, unfortunately, some
of them do not listen to me!"
Kamunde's hope is to get a permanent job with a
monthly salary. "The first thing I will do is leave my
in-laws' servant's quarters for good."
Meanwhile, the "Director of HIV or Director of
Virus", as Kamunde is endearingly called in Mombasa,
is intent on bringing sunshine and hope to the
lives of hundreds of people living with Aids and
their families.
Nothing can get her down, it seems. Talking
about her weight loss, Kamunde laughs: "OK, I
have lost 25 kg. I am only 40 years old, and that is
when life begins. I am, therefore, very happy to be
slim." - An A wefeature
