Daily Nation Thursday, FEBRUARY 6, 2003

KENYA'S KEY NEPAD ROLE

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 1
states to embrace Nepad. he said it was
now entering the second stage with top
priority being given to Africa’s dilapi
dated infrastructure.
Other priority areas would be health.
agriculture, information and communi
cation, environment and energy.
“We are entering a critical stage of
implementation and I urge African lead
ers to lend support to the initiative,”
the President pleaded with delegates to
the governing council meeting of the
United Nations Environmental Pro
gramme (Unep) in Nairobi.
The meeting that reviews Unep’s pro
grammes and charts its policies dedi
cated the better part of yesterday to
Nepad.
President Wade said aid and loans
would not help Africa’s economies.
“We have for long received aid and
loans from the inkrnational community
and none has helped us out of our eco
nomic stagnation,” he said.
The Interim Secretary General of the
African Union, Mr Amara Essy said a
department would be formed to resolve
the numerous conflicts bedevilling the
continent .
“We cannot rely on the Wcstcrn
world to broker peace for us always:
charity has to begin at home,” he said.
Experts on conflict resolution would
be reuited from the member states to
broker peace in the region.
President Wade noted that a commit
‘ ment of the West to donate 0.7 per cent
of their Gross National Product as aid to
developing countries had not been
honoured.
The high level meeting which was also
attended by over 80() delegates includ
ing Vice-President Michael Wamalwa.
called for a level playing field in trade
 between the developing and the devel
oped world.
The VP said the Kenya Government
fully supported Nepad, saying it was a
grand plan for eliminating poverty and
uplifting living standards in the
contineilt.
“We see Nepad offering the region an
opportunity to reverse the negative envi
ronmental trends being experienced.”
said Mr Wamaiwa.
The framework provided an opportu
nity for hitting millennium development
targetss for Africa: reducing poverty by
half by 2015 and reducing HIV/Aids
infection by 25 per cent by 2005.
Uncp cxeeuti,e director Klaus Tocp
fer urged African leaders to end= con
flicts and give peace a chance to make
Nepad a reality.
Planning and National Development
minister Anyang’ Nyong’o said energy
use must be given priority in Nepad.
adding it was a major factor in the suc
cess of conservation.
He also called for the estabJishnnt of
a regknal committee comprising East
African countries to help conserve Lake
Victoria.


DONORS GIVE 160M FOR STUDY ON HEALTH
By Nation Reporter

The Government yesterday received about Sh160 million
($2.1 million) from a group of donors for a health survey.
The 2003 Demographic and Health Survey by the Central
Bureau of Statistics is expected to be completed by June 2004.
It will provide programme managers, policy makers and
planners with information on health, family planning and
[llVIAids programmes to help them effectively plan and
implement future interventions.
The data collected will be used to gauge fertility levels and
preferences. family planning use, reproductive, child and
maternal health, nutritional status of young children and
women, childhood mortality levels, as well as HLV infection
rates.
Planning and National Development Ministry Permanent
Secretary Joseph Kinyua said the survey results will be made
available to policy makers in Government and non
governmental organisations.
Mr Kinyua spoke during the signing of a memorandum of
understanding between the Government and the various
donor representatives during a cercmony held at Treasury
building, Nairobi.
He was accompanied by the Director of Statistics, Mr
David Nab, and other senior ministry officials.
Support for the massive exercise will be provided by
USAid (which will provide $933,594); UNDP Japanese
Human Resources Development Fund ($3O0,056) IJNFPA
($280,826); Unicef ($122,379) DuD ($250,000); CDCJKenya
($222,000) and Nascop ($40,000).



