Daily Nation/ Thursday, August 21, 2003

HEADTEACHERS WARNED ON AIDS PUPILS
BY Nation correspondent

School heads who deny children.
infected with Aids a chance to enrol in
their schools will be punished.
Health assistant minister Gideon
Konchella yesterday said free primary
education was open to all children and
warned that tough measures would be
taken against those who disobeyed the
directive.
"Parents should report any school
head who is reluctant to give space to a
child suffering from the disease. The
programme is meant for all children,
sick or healthy," he said,
Mr Konchella said discrimination continued
to hinder the efforts to reduce
the infection levels and ensure quality
life to those infected.
"I am aware that it has been difficult
to enrol these children in schools due to
a form of subtle discrimination that
-ensures schools are too full just when
there is a HIV positive child. This is
unacceptatHe and infringes on the rights
of children as espoused in the Children's
Act," he said.
He was speaking at Kawangware during
the launch of Lea Toto Riruta office
that will coordinate the activities of
infected children in the area.
The programme is affiliated to Nyumbani
Children's Home and takes care of
orphaned children infected with Aids.
USAid Mission Director Kiert Toh
gave Sh56 million towards the programme
that will benefit 7,000 families
with children infected with Aids.
The programme will involve families
in Waithaka, Ruthimitu, Mutuine,
Kawangware and Riruta areas.
Mr Konchella thanked the USAid for
the support.


HEALTH:
SEX DRUG THAT COULD BE A NEW FIRM FAVORITE
Many men aged over 40 find
their lovemaking a bit of a
flop, it was claimed yesterday.
The spmt is willing but the flesh can be
weak, a doctor said.
And the reQledy? The choice is suddenly
bewildering with a new sex drug
called Cialis launched in Kenya to compete
with what is already a firm favourite
- Viagra.
In the US a third pill, called Levitra,
was given government approval yesterday,
It's not yet available in Kenya, say
makers GlaxoSmithKline Pic and Bayer
AG.
Cialis makes muscle cells relax, causing
an improved flow of blood to produce
the desired effect, said Dr Frank
Aswani of the pill-makers Eli Lilly, in
Nairobi.
Disclose their inability
Trials of Cialis, which costs Sh900 a pill
compared with around Sh500 for Viagra,
show it gives patients a window of
up t036 hours in which to have sex. The
window is about four hours for most
men taking Viagra and up to five hours
with Levitra. ,
Levitra's makers say a major plus is that
it works quickly with some men able to
make love within 16 minutes in clinical
trials.
Viagra maker Pfizer says studies showing
half of men taking their pill were
able to have sex within 20 minutes.
Dr Aswani for Cialis said in Nairobi
that the problem, officially called "erectile
dysfunction" was made worse
because men were often shy to disclose
their inability to make love, while their
partners were often too sensitive to risk
embarrassing them by asking them to
make love more often.
The problem therefore went undetected
and untreated.
The problem could have underlying
medical causes, the doctor said.
Disorders like diabetes, hypertension,
spinal injury and surgery could cause
erectile dysfunction. Smoking was also
a cause, along with stress at work,
depression, anxiety and hormonal factors.
'The 36-hour period of effectiveness
that this treatment offers is a unique
attribute that may help men and their
partners choose the moments that are
right for intimacy," Dr Aswani said.
Available statistics indicate that 52 per
cent of men over 40 suffer from this sex
problem, which means 152 million men
worldwide. More than one million new
cases are diagnosed every year.
Addfessing the meeting, a "sexologist",
Dr Caren J-tadders, said erectile dysfunction
dimiRished the quality of life
of men and subjected them to pain, .
Cialis is availatHe on prescription only
and cannot be bought over the counter.
Its side effects include headache, back
pain and nasal congestion,
A pack of four 25mg pills of Viagra,
which is available also on prescription
in Kenya, costs around Sh2, I00. Viagra
has side effects that include headaches,
flushing and stomach upset.
The most common side effects of Levitra
include headache, flushing and
nasal congestion with dizziness
reported in around two per cent of cases.
Kenya is the second African country to
launch Cialis, after South Africa.