Sunday Nation/ February 2, 2003
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 2
fWJr,. enjoyed the real value of their status enshrined in
~.,~ the Quran because the tenets have been subdued
.I·~ .·by ag.·,-old;wlt"".d ~"·ct;"".. "It •·th,"j,u" a.od ·."~.·;· not Islam that margmahses we.men. For Illstance,
•. ~ Islam does not subscribe to female genital
•.• mutilation as practised by Cush itic communities in
",,; Northern Kenya. Poor knowle( ge of the scripture
aggravates the plight of Muslim women - many
do not know their rights. Men subjugate women
by either ignoring holy guidelines on relationships
or interpreting them to suit mal,~dominance."
HIV/Aids and women sexuality is another key
area of concern for Nazlin. She is the secretary to
the Regional Inter-Religious HIV/Aids Network
in Africa and represents the Mlslim community in
the gender committee of It e National Aids
Control Council (Nacc). She i~ a member of the
editorial task force in thecoun :il. She sits on the
executive steering com nittee of the
Inter-Religious Aids ..Conso ·tium (Irac), an
organisation that brings togethe r faiths combating
the scourge.
Forced to leave school for mam Ige
Personal trauma and sufferinl: has encouraged
Nazlin to root for women's c,tUses. For all her
ambition to pursue formal I:ducation to the
highest level, she was forced to curtail school at
Ordinary-Level. Her parents encouraged her to
marry early, her father insisti 19 she needed a
husband to assure her protecti on. The old man
had asked her husband to allow her to pursue
further education later. "The pomise, if real, was
lost in the rigours of motterhood," Nazlin
laments.
"I decided not to let my failure to access
advanced education hamper my life. I spend a tidy
sum of my earnings on books. I may not have the
university papers, but I am determined to bridge
the knowledge gap through read ng." She says trauma is co nmon in Muslim
•
women. Many of them are tortured and
. forced to commit suicide in the name of
maintaining family ho lOUr.
"Aggrieved 'Women suffer the illusion
that fighting for thei r rights is being
disrespectful to their husbands. :Jthers are afraid
that if they agitate for their rigl ts, their morality
would be put to question. Most women shy away
from rigorous pursuit of their rights. The men
know this only too well and tak e full advantage.
Call her a prostitute, and sh,: buckles under
shame."
The practice of polygamy didnely granted in
'Islam is a recipe for spreading th,; disease within a
Muslim family, she says. This does not begrudge
the cause for polygamy she reaso 1S.It is necessary
that husbands should insist on Hiv test before
undergoing nuptials with new brides. The spouses
should routinely undergo the test to ascertain their
virus status.
On the scourge, she says: "A nong Asian and
other Muslims, there is a steady r se in the number
of infections. The situation is conpounded by the
taboo status of the disease in the particular group.
Then there is the fallacy of Mlslims being less
exposed to Aids. Because the di ;ease is believed
to ravage the Sub-Saharan region thus sparing the
predominant Muslim North, Kenyan Muslims are
encouraged by a false sense of immunity. Why areWhy are
noring the many Muslims in the sub.Saharan
who could as well corn rise a sizeable
i of the infected?”
No longer tenable to confine them
,fi; Being a vocal advocate for women's rights in the
:;, patriarchal Asian and Islamic communities has not
been easy. "Although a good number of our men,
in principle, support the idea of i wolving women
fully in decision-making, a m.ljority are not
comfortable with a woman's kadership. They
wonder why, for instance, I sh(luld issue press
'f releases in the name of Supkem. Who mandated
me to talk? Where are the men who should be
representing them?"
Women Muslims are now playir g active roles in
financial and material support for their families. It
is no longer tenable to confin: them to the
kitchen.
Nazlin walked out of a marrilge because of
"irreconcilable differences" with the father of her
four children.
"When a Muslim woman is divorced, she is a
social outcast and nobody wants to give her a
hearing. The harsh verdict is that there is
something wrong with your character. If you
cannot perform the simple task of being
some body's wife, at least, you should have the
'decency' to shut up or make yourself invisible.
They do not take it kindly if you insist on serving
public roles. They think you are the wrong
messenger. "
Her resolve not to let subjective opinion weigh
her down has borne fruit. Critics are no longer as
personal and harsh as they used to be. Support by
former Supkem secretary-general Ahmed Khalif
(now deceased), the chairman of the Council of
Imams and the Chief Kadhi has kept her hostile
critics at bay.
Nazlin, a fourth-generation Kenyan of Persian
origin, is a senior producer for the Islamic radio
station, Iqra, where she hosts a weekly radio talk
show on Islam and women.
Her earnest studies in Islam began in 1979, at St
Terasa Girls High School in Eastleigh, Nairobi,
where she volunteered to teach fellow Muslim
students the Quran. “There began my passion for
the holy book.”
She spices her conversation with quotes from
authoritative books on such issues as the
Arab-Israel conflict, the IMF1 World Bank
economic reforms in poor countries and their
effects on women and children, and the West
connection in the Aids pandemic.
Approaching your partner like a donkey
She abhors domestic violence that she considers
completely outlawed in the scriptures. “Only the
weak-minded men or women of little intelligence
resort to violence. The Quran warns against
approaching your partner like a donkey. Civility
is encouraged. Blows and kicks are forbidden.”
Naziin has given lectures on Islam, women’s
rights and Aids at universities and other forums
in America, South Africa and Burkina Faso. She
says the worJd is steeped in ignorance on Islam
and women’s rights. She has published severa)
books on these issues: Faith-Based Commwti:ies:
Response io Sexuality. Strategies, Ache’emenb
and Challenges in Our Response to H1V
Pandemic- The Islamic Perspective. The Truth of
Women in Islam. Gender, Youth and Morality in
Relation to HIV AIDS in Africa.