Sunday Nation/ June 15,2003
The place of leadership in campaign against Aids

By JOE BABENOREIER

Just as President George Bush offered to
ship a boatload of condoms to Africa, an
article in the Washingtoll Post blamed Kenyan
clergy for our burgeoning population of
Aids patients. It quotes a sermon from an
upcountry pastor thundering condemnations.
Preachers, the Post argues, have stymied efforts
to control HIV by telling people condoms don't
work,
The NGOs distributing condoms agree, They say
they arc saving lives by being as aggressive as
possible. But many church leaders remain sceptical.
After many years of heavy advertising for
·condoms all across Kenya. doctors say the
number of deaths due to Aids remains the same.
Last September. the US Agency for International
Development (USAid) published a study
titled: "Declining HIV Prevalence, Behaviour
Change. and the National Response: What Happened
in Uganda?" According to the best estimates,
HIV prevalence dropped from 30 per
cent to 5 per cent in about 10 years.
"This dramatic decline is unique worldwide." the
report notes. Many African countries have had
condom campaigns. Only one has managed to
bring the spread of HIV under cont'rol. Buried in
this success story is a crucial fact that contradicts
prevailing opinions and the "safe-sex" policies
sponsored by influential NGOs. Getting Ugandans
to use condoms was not the decisive factor.
The greatest reduction in HIV prevalence took
place before condoms were widely distributed.
Things changed when people started taking sexual
self-control seriously. The report spells this
out with statistics. making a comparison between
Uganda and several other sub-Saharan countries
severely afflicted by the pandemic. In 1YY5,
Ugandan males in the 15 to lY-year-old range
"were less likely to have ever had sex, more
likely to be married and keep sex within the
marriage, and less likely to have multiple partners,
particularly if never married."
True Love Waits
The report suggests'that the key person to push
Ugandans towmds a "zero-grazing policy" was
President Yoweri Museveni. His wife Janet
spearheaded a youth campaign, called "True
Love Waits". It is hard to pin down exactly why
these acts of leadership worked. But they did.
When the Ugandan First Couple took their
stand on Aids and began campaigning together,
something happened. They reached the hearts
and minds of the people on the street. This
implies that the key to success lies in a leader's
ability to convince people to change.
Can Kenya dramatically reduce HIV prevalence?
Docs it depend on the special effort President
Kibaki is now making? If it does. the controversy
over condoms looms as large as ever.
Many religious leaders continue to insist that
pushing condoms docs more harm than good.
Many NGOs says Mr Musevcni promoted condoms
shamelessly even while stressing abstinence
and marital fidelity. Who should President
Kibaki listen to?
Perhaps the President should listen to himself. In
early June, after attending the ordination of the
new bishop of Machakos, he addressed the
crowd. He has built his presidency on fighting
corruption and, once again, he spoke briefly but
forcefully. "Stop stealing." He said nothing
about special treatment for those unwilling to
change. On the contrary, tie sent them fair warning.
"If you don't stop stealing, we will catch
you."
Perhaps the public needs an equally forceful
message on HIV. "Save sex for marriage. Be
faithful to your spouse. If you don't, you will get
Aids and it will kill you. We need to change now.
It's a matter of life or death."
The ABC message being used now is muddled.
Telling people, "Abstain, Be faithful. use Condoms"
is like ielling thieves, if can't stop stealing
at least make sure you don't get caught. We
don't compromise when fighting graft. Why
should we compromise when encouraging men
and women to respect God's plan for sex'?