Saturday Nation/ May 31, 2003

Kibaki plays starring role
in new anti-Aids campaign

Yesterday was a unique day in President
Mwai Kibaki's diary.
He played a leading role in the shooting
of an anti-aids commercial known as
"Pamoja Campaign" at the State House lawns,
Nairobi.
Two hundred actors took part in the commercial,
which will be seen on television, bill boards, and
posters: It will also be aired on the radio.
The President is expected to launch the campaign,
which is spearheaded by the National Aids Control
Council.
The first phase of the programme is expected to be
a rallying call by the government in creating
awareness about the scourge.
The second will focus on behavioural change by
encouraging visits to Voluntary Counselling and
Testing (VCT) centres and home based care for the
afflicted.
And in a related event, the First Lady toured a
vcr centre at the Kenyatta National hospital, and
criticised doctors over failure to divulge the HIV
status of spouses to their partners.
In her first official function, Mrs Lucy Kibaki said:
"I understand this is why Aids is spreading faster.
The two should not be left to live together, in fact, it
is up to you (the VCT staff) to take the one who has
it to court since you know the doctor is reluctant to
divulge the status," she said.
Ethics rule
Mrs Kibaki criticised the ethics rule which bound
doctors to confidentiality, saying; "With Aids, there
is no confidentiality. It is spreading even now as we
are talking. Without disclosure many people will die
including expectant mothers."
Dr Margaret Gachara, the director of the National
Aids Control Council. said a Bill was pending in
Parliament on the ethics issue, which seeks to allow
doctors to disclose Aids status of individuals to their
spouses.
Mrs Kibaki said: "MPs should pass a law that any
doctor who doesn't disclose the information should
be taken to court and jailed. It's a crime. When
Kenyans hear this is happening they will be as
shocked as I am."
Accompanied by her daughter, Judy and a niece,
Mrs Kibaki said she paid school fees for Aids
orphans in schools and universities.
"I am much involved in in the Aids campaign. I
assist orphans directly and indirectly. As a woman,
mother and wife of a politician, I have been doing a
She visited the offices of the Women Fighting Aids in
Kenya on Ngong Road, and promised to work with
them ..
"I have come here as a mother to everyone in Kenya
including widows, widowers and orphans. Any time
you need anything, just call me." ,
She will lead a delegation of women to Burundi next
week for a Sub-Saharan Aids conference. ,
• Meanwhile, the President received an invitation to
visit Rwanda from President Paul Kagame at State
House, Nairobi.
It was delivered by the country's minister for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation, Dr Charles
Murigande.
Kenya is Rwanda's ninth principal trading partner
after Belgium, Burundi, Canada, Denmark,
France, Germany, Italy and Japan.
Some 26 per cent of Rwanda's global imports are
from Kenya making it the leading source of
imports for Rwanda.
Present were the Foreign Affairs minister, Mr
Kalonzo Musyoka, and the permanent secretary,
Mr Peter ole Nkuraiya.
