Daily Nation October 15, 2003

ONE WOMANS WAR AGAINST A DEADLY ENEMY

BY ELISHA OTIENO 
It Took a lot of courage for Jane Adhiambo to go public about her
HIV-positive status. But once she made the decision, she has not
looked back, and has made it a personal mission to talk about
HIV/Aids at public fora, including churches and schools.
The 32-year-old school teacher is now a well known figure in Migori
District, where she advocates abstinence and, if this is not possible,
use of condoms, to prevent HIV infection.
Having lost her husband, Isaac Otieno, to Aids in 2001, Jane is
convinced that by talking publicly about the disease, she can achieve
two things: convince people that the scourge is real and show that
one can live positively after infection. Her openness about the subject
has endeared her to the residents of Migori District, where she
lives. Her testimonies on positive living, advice on caring for those
affected and infected and caution on avoiding infection have convinced
many that Aids is a reality.
"I want to ensure that information on Aids reaches all parts of
Migori and the entire Nyanza Province and convince people that the
scourge is with us," she says. "That is why I attend public functions in
the district to talk to people and convince them to change their attitudes
and behaviour to avoid infection."
"I want to change the perception among some members of my
community that Aids is a curse." she adds.
Spirited attempts
Contrary to the expectations of her community, Jane has refused to
re-marry, arguing that re-marriage is one of the major causes of Aids
infection.
" I flatly refused to be inherited
despite spirited attempts
by my husband's clan. I did not
want to infect anybody. My
conscience would not allow me
to do so," she asserts ..
The grave reality of Jane's
status dawned on her in 2000,
when she tested positive at the
Homa Bay District Hospital.
She was prompted to go for
voluntary testing following her
husband's prolonged ailment.
They had married in 1993 after
graduating from Migori
Teachers Training College.
"My husband had become
very sick and we were both
advised to go for an Aids test.
The outcome was shocking.
We were positive," she says.
"The man could not believe his
ears, but that was the reality."
COURAGE: Jane Adhiambo Consequently, she does not
want her past to bog her down.
"I can't tell who infected the other, but the fact is that we both tested
positive. All the same, I do not want to dwell on the past because
that can haunt me and consume my energy, thus clouding my vision
for the future," she says.
"Worry brings stress and death, so I steer clear of it. I eat well and
use anti-retroviral drugs," she says, adding that she often seeks medication
when attacked by opportunistic diseases.
A member of Power of Jesus Around the World Church, Jane
goes to church every Sunday and shares her experiences with other
members. She says the church has not been spared by the scourge
and is losing both leaders and ordinary members to Aids.
Her challenge to others living with Aids is to come out in the open
and talk freely about their status.
Facing reality
"Let us stop hiding and face the reality about our condition. That is
the only way we can help ourselves and our communities," she says.
One of the activities that Jane is involved is coordinating Help
Widows and Orphans Group, an organisation involved in creating
Aids awareness through drama and music concerts.
The organisation has set up a computer training centre in Migori
Town, which raises money to support Aids orphans and widows.
Jane advocates home-based care for those living with Aids, saying
communities need to support those affected of'infected to cope with .
their conditions ..
The infection rate in Migori District stands at 30 per cent, with the
worst hit being young people aged between 15 and 25. And as the
number of widows and widowers rises, so does that of orphans.
Migori District Hospital'Superintendent Peter Okoth says HIV
positive patients take about 60 per cent of the beds in the institution.
Hard hit is Sony Sugar Company in Awendo, where factory workers
and farmers are vulnerable since they have disposable incomes,
which tempt some to engage in unsafe sexual activities. Equally at
risk are communities living around Lake Victoria, where good
returns from fishing lead some to live recklessly.
A government survey shows a slow change in sexual behaviour
mainly attributable to deep-seated cultural beliefs and practices, coupled
with high levels of poverty and illiteracy.
