Daily Nation/ May 14, 2003
Daughter cuts off help for man who stopped wedding


"I wanted a man in my life, and one thing led to
another. I met the man in my life, and he accepted
me. We decided to marry," she says. But when she
mentioned the matter to Ogendo, he would have
none of it.
"Realising that my father was adamant, I asked
my love to move in with me as we planned a civil
wedding. My father then sent a group of people to
my house to terrorise me and intimidate my husband,"
says the nurse.
"Our love was growing from strength to strength,
we went to the DC's office in Kisii, where we
applied to be married, giving the mandatory 21-day
notice.
"Since I was busy, I requested my fiancee to go
to the DC's office to confirm that everything was
just fine. He returned with good news from the district
clerk, that all was well," says the bride.
The couple then hired vehicles and shopped for
the big day, but there was to be no ceremony. District
Officer Christopher Musumbu turned them
away, saying that the bride might be somebody's
wife.
It was crushing. After a two-hour wait, the couple
stormed out of the DO's office and posed for
pictures outside for the benefit of curious civil servants
gawking at them.
As they marched to their car, the bride
remarked: "This was a private maller. Why did [the
DO] have to consult my father? I know my father
wants to deny me my conjugal rights by measuring
the amount of love I should have, from whom and
even how.
"I cannot succumb to his intimidation. He has
stopped our marriage but that will not stop me
from staying with the man I love," she said.
Musumbu had advised the couple to swallow
seek out the old man and try to reconcile with him.
If they could find Sh 10.000 for Ogendo, perhaps he
would attempt to reconcile them and perform the
ceremony if they returned to see him the following
Monday.
The couple did not show up on the appointed
day, but Ogendo, his wife Nyabengeye, and the
dead man's brother, Oseti Getenga, were at the
DO's office long before nine o'clock.
After waiting for several hours, the DO asked
them to leave. He would send for them, he said.
It was then that Nyabengeye and Oseti made new
demands that the couple should first test results for
HIV, and if they were uninfected, then Ogendo
could accept any dowry paid and agree to perform
any ceremonies to cancel the "first marriage".
Spe.aking from her work station, the bride said
this week: "I have my life to lead and I want to forget
the disturbances caused by the two families as
soon as possible."
Oseti, for his part, says the Getenga family is
ready to welcome their estranged daughter-in-law
back and forgive her for "embarrassing our late
brother".
"I will not allo~ her to remarry but can decide to
stay with any man bearing in mind that if she dies,
she will be buried ather marital home in Bomachoge.
But the nurse has better ideas: "I will move to
court to block my father from interfering in my life.
Then I will seek protection of my rights as any
other human being."
According to the Gusii customs, any married
woman whose dowry had been paid remains the
wife of the dead man unless the dowry paid was
returned with approval from both parents.
The marriage saga is the talk of Kisii. Gladys
Atambo, who is studying law at Moi University,
supports the woman's determination to marry but
advises that she first seeks reconciliation with her
father before her marriage.
"All laws tend to respect customary marriages,
and to avoid court embarrassment, she should go
the extra mile and try to convince her father about
this marriage," she says.
Alternatively, the woman could raise the dowry
and have her new father in-law deliver it to the
Getenga home, then formalise her marriage.
Sheila Njoki, who works as a salonist, sees mischief
in'Ogendo's allempts to block his daughter's
marriage. She reserves her harshest words for the
administrator who declined to officiate the marnage.
William Obara, 72, says Ogendo was right to
decline the dowry before the first marriage was
annulled. He warns that in case of death, the widow
will be buried at her first matrimonial home,
according to Gusii traditions.
Obara sees a way out for the couple: The new inlaws
should pay twice the dowry Ogendo received
and plead with him to give them his daughter.
On the new demand for an HIV test, Pastor
Stanley Nyachienga of the SDA church says couples
should voluntarily take the Aids test.
"With the high rate of infection of the killer disease,
it is for their own benefit that the couples first
go for HIV/Aids tests before tying the knot:' he
says.