DAILY WEDNESDAY Nation/ February 5,2003 
I KEEP GETTING INTO RUINOUS RELATIONSHIPS


Dear Amani,
I am a 50-year-old married man. Every time I get a loan, there
are women who are always ready to help me spend it, after
which they disappear. I have helped a good number, especially
the bereaved. They normally talk very nicely, and I always end
up in their arms. I have bought houses, plots and cars for them.
I only come to my senses w len the money is gone and my family
needs food and clothing.
Their approach is always that they want to do business with
me. In the end, though, the;' con me. Then they resurface when
there is another loan. The s'upid thing about me is that I do not
know how to put them off. ) always pity them because they have
no husbands.
The funny thing is that I have not bought even a plot for
myself and now I am about to retire. I prefer to give these peo-
.. pIe money and forget my mm family. Please help me out of
these problems before it is tDOlate. My wife tells me I will get
Aids, but we end up quarreling, because I do not want to hear of
it.
Please Amani, you are tb! last hope. I do not want to lose my
family.
Dear worried man;
It is good to help the bereaved, but doing it in exchange for sex
can be dangerous, especiall) in this era of HIV IAids. Your wife
is, therefore, right in telling {au about the risk of getting Aids
from your relationships. It i~ a fact that the highest mode of
transmission of HIV IAids is through sex. From your letter, you
have stated that you go for t ereaved women. Do you ever take
time to know what killed tht ir husbands? Do you use any pro- ..
tection?
Your other concern is the spending of your loan on property
for the bereaved women, who keep on dumping you after your
money is finished. You also ceep falling back into the arms of
other widows immediately y )u are rejected. Could this be love
addition? Love addiction is ,ill ingrown dependency relationship
with another person serving as the object of our need for security.
The addict, therefore, needs the other person to make life
bearable.
The addicted person goes to the lover with the aim of filling a
void in himself. The relation::hip becomes the centre of his life
because it offers him solace that contrasts sharply from what he
finds at home. The person then keeps on returning to it more
and more. When it is not the 'e, the person feels lost. The addict
is, therefore, just drawn to th e object (in your case the bereaved
women) for security and pie, sure, but the object traps them
instead of offering security, and prevents them from growth due
to dependency.
This creates a feeling of in.ldequacy as they have to keep on
leaning heavily on the object (the woman) to achieve their "happiness".
As they get deeper mto the problem, their world
becomes narrower as they neglect their families, themselves,
friends, colleagues, relatives. md responsibility in order to focus
on their lovers, who usually are very demanding.
Their emotional security e epends on the relationship and
their fear of rejection is intensified as they get more and more
involved with the person. Thl:y are ready to using any means to
keep the relationship. In case of rejection, the addicts desperately
tries to find another par tner so as to re-establish their "artificial
equilibrium". The addict feels completely powerless over
the relationship. Could this b ~what is happening to you?
Your self-worth seems to have been destroyed by bad relationships
and a long string of unsuccessful attempts to replace
them by using money to control or feel powerful to people who
are vulnerable. But instead 01 feeling powerful you feel used.
Could you be trying to satisfy your needs through the wrong
means?
Your asking for help could signal your dissatisfaction. Being
aware that there is a problem is a good starting point. It might
be helpful to do a self-evaluation and find out who you are in
relation to others, what you \\ ant from relationships, especially
with the opposite sex, and YOllr reasons for going into these relationships
- is it for money, Ie ve, sex or a fulfilling relationship.
Learn to repair your own spirit and to know that love is possible
only when we reach out te another person from our
strengths rather than our wea messes. Happiness is within you
and you can appraise yourself with other achievements other
than love - like in your case, having a job that can sustain the
heavy loans that you've beenaking, capability to service them
and a loving wife who caution; you. Lastly, try to create an emotional
balance by meeting your own needs first and then other
needs.
Learn to take the risk of sa) ing no to these women and taking
responsibility over your life. III case of need for further help
please talk to a professional counsellor.
Dear Amani,
Amani Counsellors, POBox .11738, Tel:602672/3,
emaikaccti@africaonline.com:'
I keep getting
into 1~inous
relationships
Amani Counsellors