Daily Nation / Monday, March 31, 2003

CHURCHES AT FRONTLINE IN AIDS WAR
Religious organisations have stepped
up campaigns against Aids after the
'gover:1ment reached out to them last
week.
The launch of tte'new Aids campaign by President
Mwai Kibaki on March 25, was followed
by meetings, beginning with Catholics, then
~nglicans, Methodists, Muslif\ls and PresbyterIans.
More than 3 million Kenyans are infected with
HIV - 10 per cent of the population - while
more than 1.5 rr.illion have died of Aids
related complications.
.People living with HIV occupy about 50 per
cent of beds in Kenyan hospitals, according to
government figures released last year.
Director of Medical Service Richard Muga
says: "About 90 per cent of Kenyans are not
infected and thi 3 is the population we would
want to jealously"guard against being infected."
Aids infection rate has reduced from 14 per
cent to 10 per cent after the government
declared it a na'jonal disaster in 1999.
Dr Muga attributes the reduction to interventions
in 2000 sa'iing : " ... and the war must
continue to reaiise HIV/Aids free society."
"This is a good time to join forces; this war is
like football, where all of us must work to
score at the goal mouth, which leads us to a
healthy populalion for development, rather
than the one of the burden of disease, poverty
and death," he :;aid,
Although Kenya had won the war against
tuberculosis, the advent of HIV/Aids has led
to 70,000 cases. The government is offering
free drugs for tuberculosis at all public, private
and mission hospitals across the cQuntry.
It emerged from the meetings that religious
organisations have the capacity to reach more
people in the campaign than any other institution
..
The Catholi2 Church, through its dioceses,
hosp!ta,ls, schools and colleges, can teach and
counsel people living with HIV, the virus that
causes Aids,
The church not only cares for Aids patients
but also takes care of children orphaned by the
scourge, according to the chairman oflo..e.
Episcopal Conference,
Archbishop
John Njue.
Health minister
Charity Ngilu,
who spent last
week at the meetings
of religious -
groups, had one
message: "The government is looking for seric
-ous partners who will help fight HIV/Aids,"
However, the government's propQ.salfor promoting
condom use met resistance fromsome
faiths.
For some churches, there are no two ways
about it - chastity for unmafJied and faithfulness
for the married. ,;"
But for the government, Dr Muga'sstatement
summed it up: "The condom is not everything,
but those who are a danger to others should be
counselled to use it. It has been tested and
found to work".
Bishop Philip Sulumeti, who is in charge of
health and family life at the Kenya Episcopal
Conference, said: "To stop the spread of Aids
we ask that chastity and faithfulness be '
emphasised."
Bishop Cornelius Korir, the chaplain of the
Armed Forces asked: "Why can't we take a
gDkFsre-pandsay 'Nocondom talk' about condom
use, and instead intensify counselling?"
All the faiths said the government should supply
anti-retroviral drugs at health centres.
They also agreed on the need to tell people to
change their sexual behaviour.
The Methodist Church went a mile further
with the Presiding Bishop, Dr Stephen Kanyaru
M'lmpwii, threatening to take disciplinary
a~tJonagainst polygamous members.
T~e faJth~complained that while they were
usmg thelT own resources to fight HIV/Aids
t~e government. was giving money to associ~-
tlOnsand orgamsatlOns which did little to com.
bat the scourge.
The religio~s organisations asked the governme~
t .to 'YaJ~eduty on goods imported by
their mstttutlOns, especially those to do with
neaWn,
Mrs Ngilu said the provision had been abused
but promised to seek the possibility of waiving
duty on such institutions.