Daily Nation/ Friday, November 14, 2003
Varsity reaching out to the community
Egerton's Resource Centre giving hope and skills to people living with HIV/Aids

By LORRAINE ANYANGO 
Society tends to alienate people infected
with HIV/Aids, making them feel they
have nothing to live for. At the Egerton
University in Njoro, a project aimed at
giving hope and self-respect to people
living with Aids, while re-integrating'them into
society, has been set in motion.
The university's Community Resource Centre
(CRC) seeks to give an opportunity to people
infected with HIV within the surrounding community
to engage in productive activities, even as they
deal with the killer disease.
The centre is also offers use of its resources to
those visiting the centre. Lecture theatres are used
for training and counselling, while young people
from the neighbourhood have seized the opportunity
and are using the university's computer laboratories
to acquire IT skills ..
For now, however, they can only use the facilities
on weekends - when the university's regular students
are not using them - as they await the'completion
of a building that will house the community
centre. The administration of the centre not only
provides preventive services, but also aims to integrate
Aids patients into viable economic and social
roles. There are also innovative programmes for
mothers of Aids patients and orphans.
Alongside the HIV/Aids programmes, the
resource centre also has a cyber cafe. When complete,
the centre will also operate a shop, a restaurant,
youth programmes, knitting and dressmaking
courses, information technology classes and a
health clinic.
The project is jointly funded by Egerton Univer-
·sity and McCormack Graduate School of Public
Policy in Boston, US.
The centre aims at harnessing young people's talents
before they drift to self-destructive activities
like drug abuse or risky sexual behaviour, which is
one of the main ways by which HIV/Aids is spread.
It has so far trained and awarded guidance and
counselling and computer literacy certificates to 32
young people, mainly girls, who are currently working
with others in clubs and schools in the university's
neighbouihood in anti-HIV/Aids campaigns.
Counselling and IT
Rahab Kamau, who went through six months of
training in counselling and IT, said the knowledge
they acquired at the centre had enabled them to
reach and counsel many young people in and out of
school.
Together with some of the others who graduated,
she is now discouraging youths from indulging in
drugs, thereby reducing their risk of contracting
HlV/Aids.
The 32 were selected for training after being
interviewed by the centre's staff, and following consultations
with local church leaders. They were all
required to have finished Form Four, so that a uniform
training programme could be designed for
them.
Although lack of finance remains an obstacle to .
their aims, says Kamau, some of the skills they had
acquired, particularly computer training, were marketable.
When completed, the centre will house diverse
social and economic programmes to address the
HIV/Aids in the community, as well as within the
university.
The dean of the faculty of Arts and Social Science
at the University, Dr Michael Thuo Kuria,
who. doubled up as the centre's coordinator, said
that there was need to bridge the gap between the
university's students and the out-of-school youths
living around the university.
Dr Kuria, who died on Monday soon after conducting
the Nation round the centre, said it was also
a meeting place for mothers whose children have
died of Aids-related complications." The programme,
he added, would give such mothers funds
and a forum where they could share their experiences
and find relief, knowing they were not alone.
'Participants would be equipped with life skills to
help them to exercise self-control.and later, even
counsel others, Kuria said.
"We shqJl provide each participant with a role
model among the professors in order to create a
sense of self-worth and dignity.
Kuria said the McCormack School was in the
process of setting up a university consortium to
develop similar community resource centres in all
public universities in the country.
Advisory'board
The First Lady, Mrs Lucy Kibaki, will chair the
advisory board of the consortium. Others on the
board include the chair of the National Aids Control
Council, Prof Miriam Were, renowned educationist
Dr Eddah Gachukia, and industrialist Dr
Manu Chanda ria.
The multi-faceted programme will target mainly
young uninfected people, who, without effective
intervention, could soon get infected.
The first stage of the project will involve the
establishement of cyber cafes and computer laboratories
in the universities.
The universities, in collaboration with local partners,
will focus their varied expertise on different
aspects of HIV/Aids, including medical care, dispensing
of medicine, care giving and the reintegration
of Aids patients into society.
Appropriate technology, including satellite radio,
will be used as tools for data gathering, and communication
to support the programme.
Kljria regretted, though, that the community did
not like the university students because during
strikes, the students had destroyed their property.
Paricularly hard-hit had been small-scale traders
whose businesses were barely off the ground.
The centre, he said, had intentionally been established
outside the university campus to create a situation
where members of the public would interact
with university students and get to know them,
making it easier for them to work together
Some Njoro residents living near the campushave
praised the university for taking a positive step
towards combating Aids at the community level,