Daily Nation/ Friday, September 12, 2003
Children pour out their
heartsin Aids messages

BY PHILO IKONYA
Adults write carefully, vaguely and guardedly
when their turn comes to sign the community
messages book on Aids at Nairobi's St
Andrew's Presbyterean Church.
But not so the children.
When they begin to express themselves, Information
and Tourism Minister Raphael Tuju's "Lets
fight back Aids so that Aids can be beaten!" or the
distant "God bless you" do not hold a candle to
how the children pour out their feelings on Aids.
"God cares for those who are six [sick],:' writes a
six year-old boy who is HIV positive. There is a
queue of child~en behind him eager to put their
feelings and thoughts to paper.
"Auntie, now I know you wiUlive longer," writes
a little girl. All her hope is pegged on access to care
that is a part of fighting the virus. Other little ones
write of how they miss people the¥ have lost to
Aids ..
In their little doodly handwritings, their emotions
pour out in all sincerity. Their thoughts so humane,
their hope so unfailing, their fears too strong to be
dismissed.
Seven-year-old Karoli Njoroge writes three different
messages. "Take care!" then, "Aids is a killer
'deseas' [sic], and after a while,'returned to pen:
"Aids is a very bad deseases [sic]."
It is Sunday at St Andrew's Church, and worshippers
are queuing to put their messages and names
down. These messages will be pasted on a quilt and
be used to make a tapestry to be hung on the walls
of the Kenyatta International Conference Centre
during the 13th International Conference on HIV/
Aids and Sexually Transmitted Infections in Africa.
The quilt will be read by over 7,000 delegates
who will be meeting to discU£.~"A.=~s to Care".
Messages will be taken down in many otherplaces around the country.
Keen to read
There is joy in knowing that children can spontaneously
write down their fears and be keen to read.
For many of the children at the church, it was
important for them to know how their agemates
came to be infected if, as one put it, "they do not do
sex because they are too young" ..
Explaining that children can be infected in their
mother's wombs or at birth does not always quiet
anxieties. Did the mother get the doctor's permission
to have him as a baby who did not get Aids?
Another concludes that he has Aids because a
woman living with the disease gave him a kiss on
the cheek.
Answering the children's questions requires
patience, honesty and courage, but it is a job that
must be done as part of the growth of dialogue on
HIV /Aids.
Tuju says people should be encouraged to take
the HIV test, and challenges the church to do more
in breaking the silence over Aids.
Society needs to embrace those infected as a way
of breaking the stigma with which people living
with Aids are treated.
. When he speaks again, Tuju talks of hope and
windows of opportunity as Kenyans get informed
about Aids. That there are discordant couples -
only one partner is infected - and these are in the
range of 40 per cent of all couples.
The Reverend George Wanjau, a former moderator
of the Presbyterean Chruch, writes, "God
cares, we care!" It echoes what Pastor phYllis
Ochillo, and many others, had asked worshippers to
do: take Aids personally and care for everyone
affected and infected.
Aids has proved just how difficult it is to influence
human sexual behaviour this way or that. It
has demonstrated how much human beings are
creatures of habit. But HIY /Aids has also taught,
the world the value of putting up a brave fight.
Humanity's hope lies in information and action.
In spite of the sad reality that faces mankind, in
spite of so many deaths, so many children getting
orphaned, so many suffering without medication, so
many being afraid of testing and others testing,
Aids is a challenge that is being faced head-on.
Some of the messages on the quilt demonstrate
just how people are doing that: "Abstinence could
save you, but information could save a friend. Get
information"; "Aids is not a disease of the poor";
"Access to care is possible"; "People with Aids can
live long and productive lives"; " Lets fight Aids,
not people living with Aids."
Most of these short messages will be used to
make banners that will be displayed along the
streets of Nairobi during the Icasa conference.

FIRST LADIES COMING TO TOWN FOR A MAJOR MEETING
Some of the seven first lad.ies expected at a
major Aids meeting in Nairobi will don
tracksuits on September 20 to run as a show
of solidarity with girls and women ravaged by the
disease .
Already, four wives of Africanheads6fstate
have confirmed attendance of the Qrganisation of
First Ladies Against Aids meeting in Nairobi and
will take part in activities during the International .
Conference on Aids and Sexually Transmitted .
Infections in Africa (Icasa) at the Kenyatta International
Conference Centre (KICC). The first ladies'
participation in the meeting is being seen as giving
HIY/Aids a high political profile.
Kenya's First Lady Lucy Kibaki, who has invited
the other first ladies, registered for the run on Monday.
The run is one of the major curtain-raisers to
the Icasa conference, which w~l bring together over
7,000 delegatedrom Africa and the rest of the
world.
Mrs'Kibaki and first ladies from Uganda, Gabon
and Rwanda are among those who have confirmed~
attendance, and are expected to perform certain
activities during the meeting. It will be the first time
that Kenya is hosting first ladies in such large num~
bers.
During the ICAs1\. meeting, the first ladies are
expected to hold a two-day Organisation of First
ladies Against Aids meeting.
ICASA is one the biggest events to ever happen
in recent tjmes in Kenya, and official sources said
security and other arrangements for the first.iadies
were complete.
President Mwai Kibaki, who is the patron of the
conference, has appoint~dJhree government minis"
ters - lIealth's Charity Ngilu,1'0urism's Raphael
Tuju, and National SecuritY"'3Chris Murungaru -
to ensure that its success •.
The conference, held every two years, is expected
to outline strategic priorities, charting the way for- .
ward onbow to tackle HIY/Aids from an African
viewpoint.
It brings together top African al!d other world
scientists, social and political leaders as well as communities
to share their experiences'imd current'
trends in the management of HIY/Aids and STIs.
Two years ago, the 12th Icasa meeting was held in
Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso. The theme of the
conference was 'The Communities Commit Themselves'.
Started in 1987 to address HIY/Aids and STIs
and providing solutionsJrom an African perspective,
Icasa is one the most highly regarded events in
the world.
The Nairobi meeting, which will be held between
September 21 and 26, is the thirteenth. Its theme is
'Care to Access: Challenges.'
Access to antiretroviral drugs, prevention of
mother-to~child transmission of HIY, opportunistic
infections, and Aids vaccine development are some
of the major issues expected to feature.
Away from the scientific arguments, the conferenCe
has also set into motion a flurry of other activities.
Over 150ushers are being recruited to welcome
the guests. An estimated 600 security personnel are
earmarked for deployment to ensure security
around the conference and in areas where the delegates
will stay.
And for KICC, the sun has never shone as bright
as now. Everything is being spruced up: walls are
gleaming with new paints, the lighting system is
under repair, and standby generators are being
installed. At the end of it all, the government will
have spent over ShIGOmillion.

AN AWC FEATURE