Daily Nation/ Friday, February 21,2003
KENYAN CHILDREN BEING LURED INTO INTERNATIONAL SEX TRADE

JOHANESBURG,THURSDAY
Unknown numbers of Kenyan.
children are being lured or kid
napped before being sold into
prostitution in South Africa, the
world’s newest market foc child sex.
The United Nations Commission for.
refugees reveals in a report that Ken
yan children, as well as those fror
Uganda. Angola. Mozambique. Sen
egal and Elhiopia are being lured to
the streets of Cape Town and Johan-
nesburg to work as prostitutes. Other
.Mnes vhose cwk1ren could be end
ing up in South African cities include
‘l’hailand, China and the nations of
Eastern Europe. The. UNHCR revela-e
bons are contained in an expert’s
report lo the commission.
Angolan, Congolese and Nigerian
. criminal rings are said to be responsi
bic for much of the trafficking, but
criminal elements from Bulgaria. Thai-.
land, China and Russia arc also said to
bc involved,
The report was compiled by UN offi
cials who visited South Africa last year
to investigate the high incidents of ‘
abuse, rape and child prostitution in
the country.
The group found that hunger. pov
erty and the apartheid legacy all
impacted on crimes involving children..
“The very desperate food shortages.
in countries bordering South Africa is
contributing Lo an increase in traffick
ing of children.” [le report said.
About 15. million people arc affected
by a hunger crisis in Africa. The report.
also found that lack of public freedoms
and equality under the racist apartheid
regime which ended in 1994 with the
country’s first all-race elections, was
often a9ong the causes of abuse. .
“Haired has accumulated. Violence
has accumulated. The traditional rela
tions of family harmony were seriously
. damaged by decades of oppressn and
contempt, and their present manilesta-.
lions in devious forms arc shocking.” .
the report said. ‘
Often desperate conditions have
sometimes lead parents to sell their
own children into prostitution.
“...In many cases the parents actu-.
ally encourage oce the child to
earn money this way.” the report said.
Other children, orphaned by Aids,
sell their bodies for food,in order to
survive. About one in nine South Afri-
cans is living with HIV!Aids and
662.(Ml() children under the a o
have lost one or both parents to the
disease.
Young girls are often especially vul
nerable, according to the report. Chil-b
drcn are also sometimes targeted by
l-11V positive adults who believe that
sex with a minor could cure them of
the disease.
Last year. the South African Human
Rights Coqnniission found that almost
one-third of children in the country
had been sexually abused.
Despite this, UN investigators fòund
there is no adequate framework in (he
country for children who have been.
abused or arc in need of treatment for
Aids. ,
AP