Daily Nation/ November 26, 2003

HOW SAFE IS YOUR CHILD? PROTECTING CHILDREN AGAINST SEXUAL PREDATORS

As Kenyans gear up towards a month of fest,viles. we are reminded that
there are many children in Kenya who may not be gearing up to the
celebrations due lo shattered dreams stemnhir)9 from child abuse. There are
thousands of children who are HIV positive as a consequence of abuse and
many more who have pen-ranent physical and psycttolocaI scars as a
consequence of the same. Last weelç the world marked the Child Rights
Week with highlights such as the Universal (Jay Against Child Abuse
celebrated on the eve al the Universal CMd Rights Day (20th Noveri-iber)
that is intended to renind us of the duty we owe these Vulnerable of our
society. Unfolunately, our sensibilities haye been closed to the vulnerability
to abuse Ici our children . We. often thin o) abuse as O’OCurrinö. td,other
chlklrenand not tooUrs, yel the bad nOw is your child is probably un4eroiñg
sexual -abuse as you read this-article, 1,asundergOfle abusa. or, lat’
heightened risk of sexuaL-abuse. As Kenya mOiis 16 dayš of activism bn-’
gender-based violence, we are reminded ttat for women and girls, the risk
factor remains being female. According to statistics frofl the CRADLES
Case Trends Monitor that hghIights trends in cases handled by the CRADLE,
approximately 81% of all cases handled in our legal aid clinic constitute
sexual abuse of girls. 52 % of these consittule defilement of girls below 16
years. 14% rape of girls between 16 and l7years. 10% abduction of guis
below l6years and 5 % involve incest. These ledeed constitute an extremely
smat percentage of the total number children and won-ten who suffer sexual
abuse daily in our country. Most of these cases go unreported due to various
factors ildudir,g stigmatization, embarrassment or fear of family break down,
especially ti the abuser s a relative
The profite of an abuser Is even more disturbkig and calls for great caution
especially among parents. We often beeve that the abuser is that gruesome
horrible, unkempt, ogre-like male stranger who stalks our children ln dark,
unLitaUsys and who secretly monitors the movements of parents and once he
conhmis that they are away from home, mercilessly descends on the children
 and wrecks havoc. We are convinced that the abuser must be tt,at stÅstance
abuser who stalks unsuspecting children or wayfays them n thick bushes and
that once a chance presents itself he pounces on them and sexually abuses
thõni. While indeed these aie possible abusers. CRADLE’s experience points
to other unlikely quarters. . ‘..
Hi9h on the list of abusers s that trusted school-teacher, pastor, uncle.
netghbor, doctor and aunt. In our study, amongst the professionals. teachers
rank highest and amongst those with access to dieldien the trusted neighbor
follows hOt on the heals. Many of th, abusers are persons the child trust and
they use the trust as a basis of luring the child. The site of abuse will often be
the neighbors home, the parents home (especially  house helps and.
relatives indudlnq fathers). Others wiN abuse children in bushes or thickels
especially ¡f they are not frequented or ll a child uses It laie ¡n the evenings,
Unfortunately some children are kiNed subsequent to the sexual abuse
especially-It they happen to know the abuser and whole communities have to
live in tear foc themselves and their children If no one ¿s apprehended. Cases of
abuse by dpciors in hospitals or private d,nics have also been reported
Lllcewise persons holdrg high public offices have been reported to abuse
house—helps who In. most cases conceivé and are thrown out to go and bring up
children on their own. . , . . .
Cases of Incest have increased over the years. This has especially affected
girls between four and seven years. In a number of cases gills with mild
retardation have been known lo be easy targets. Subsequently mothers who
are accused of rncitlng children against the fathers are forced lo flee for their
lIves. The CRADLE has often been forced to grapple with the problem of not
only enšuring thai the offender is brought to book but also obtaining shelter toi
the women arId their children. it has been established that these women have
on many occasions ran back to their parents due lo extreme physical violence
by their husbend and it they leave thai, children behind these áre turned into
sexual objects. Unfortunately some df these girls get infected with sexually
transmitted diseases including HIV!Aids. This spells double tragedy as the very
poison who is supposed to ensure the protection and welfare of the family
causes untold suffering. , ,.
Extreme efforts are often made by abusers to conceal the abuse including
bathing the Child, ireats of death O even idlling the chad. Due lo lear ctldren
keep quiet tor long periods. In some cases they wrIl confine In their friends or
exhibit some behaviors especially withdrawal or retissai to be bathed. By the
time parents r to learn Of this any Possible evidence thai may lead to a
cnviction wil have been destroyed. Distraught parents have often been
asked whether they suspected sexual abuse of their children especially by
their spouses and .e first answer Is usually no. Upon reflection they say that
,i they been keen they wodð have been able to interpret certain signs but
by then the damage is already dane. -
The effects of abuse range from sexually transmitted diseases to extreme
trauma. Children have exhibited signs of withdrawal, anxiety, aggression,
regressive development behavior and emotional disorders such as
depression. Most of these effects are lOng-term meaning that the child has to
live with the abuse for better part of her life. Protection of every child from this
kind of danger then becomes extremely necessary. The passing of the
criminal amendment Act was a positive move espéclaijy the raising of the age
of consent to 16 years rernovai of requirement of coation encement
of the sentence for sexual abusers and Inclusion of boys as victims of abuse.
There is however need for a comprehensive Law that addresses sexual
offences in a more holistic manner. There Is need to expand the offences
against morality to indude expaoita of children iii video shows or massage
palours and to include trafficicing and sale m chaciren. The CRADLE  jfl
on the Attorney General to Corne up with a Sexuai Offences Law that wi1
ensure better protection of our Ctlil&eri jle we await for action from the
Attorney General, we urge brou tO ensure the safety 0f IOLN Children by:
ensuring they are not Isolated, teaching them about sexual matters and sexual
safety and security, seeking medical attention immediately Wi case of abuse
and seeking police assistance,
You may also contact ThE CRAD1I..   o
as the hiki Rights Advisory Documentation and Legal Center, which isa
non partisan, non profit making and non non governmental organization
itted to the protection, promotion and enhancement of the tights of the
child through court repreeantalion advocacy and law reform. Our contacts
are: 27101 6 or email us at õradle@wanancht corn