Daily Nation/ May 28, 2003

A BOOK OF MEMORIES TO HELP CHILDREN COPE WITH DEATH
By PHILIP MWANIKI
Family life, for 50-year-old Catherine
Wangui, has been a series of divorces and
marriage break-ups.
"I never got to know my grandfather
after he divorced my grandmother. My parents,
too, divorced when I was in teenage; and now I
am also separated from my husband ..
"If my children were to be left without me, they
wouldn't have anyone to talk to,:' she says. Wangui
worries about the memories her children will
have of their family. She is HIV positive, and agonizes
about leaving them alone.
"In the book I am preparing, I will include
information about all the male parents in the
extended family. The children never came to
know them. The break-ups left children being
raised only by their mothers:' she says.
Wangui's is not just a record of family memories.
It is a scrap book containing details about her
wishes, her belongings and what should happen to
them, and how she would like her children to live
when she is no longer with them.
And she is not alone in preparing a record of
her life. Many infected parents are being trained
to prepare their children for eventual death.
Since her parents disclosed their HIV status to
her, Mercy Mukami':' has been worrying endlessly.
She is the eldest in her family, and is dogged by
the fear of what her relatives might do once her
parents die.
The Memory Book initiative, launched by the .
Society of Women and Aids in Kenya (Swak),
ensures that parents leave their children with
information on their family history. Parents are
shown how to prepare the book, and to include
information about all their property and how they
would like their children to use it in their absence.
"In the book, the children can feel their parents'
presence, th.ereby reducing the trauma that
comes with being orphaned," says Mercy Wahome,
Swak's assistant coordinator.
The Memory Book is produced in loose sheets
of paper, each with a different heading - such as,
"My favourite memories for you and my hopes for
your future."
Photographs and other items that carry unique
memories - like happy moments together and
engagement rings - can be put aside and stories
about them included in the book.
People are encouraged to make photostat copies
of the book to make sure that not just a few
people have access to it.
"The project enables children orphaned by
Aids to live with positive memories of their parents,"
says Wahome.
The idea of the Memory Book originated in the
United Kingdom, as a tool to help the children of
cancer patients cope with the death of their parents.
"This idea was adopted for use by people
infected by HIV/Aids and is quickly gaining
momentum," Wahome says.
In Uganda the National Community of Women
Living with HIV/Aids launched the initiative in
llJlJ5.The organisation's chairperson, Scovia
Kasolo, says the initiative "has since registered
massive success with the children orphaned by
Aids in the country".
Kaso!o is also the lead trainer of the Memory
Book initiative in Kenya and Uganda. Kenyans
first got involved in the Memory Book project at
the beginning of 200\.
American charities such as USAid, through the
. Family Health International (FHI), and the Bill
and Melinda Gates Foundation, finance the
project through the Hope for the African Child
Initiative.
Children get to be equipped with information
and knowledge they can fall back on and help
them seek assistance from relatives, or appeal to
the law in case of abuse or being disinherited.
"It is necessary for parents since they don't
know what will become of their children after
their death:' Wahome says.
Tabitha Gathungu, who is Swak's secretary in
Central Province, says some relatives have vehemently
protested against the idea of the memory
book, believing it to be a harbinger of death.
Simon Wamai, 32, says: "It gives one a feeling
that he is writing a death wish, making him realise
that he is dying and that is what creates discomfort."
Wamai, who has been trained under the initiative,
says what keeps him and other patients
going is the fact that it is to benefit their children.
So far, 30() HIV-positive people from all the
country's eight provinces have been trained on
how to prepare a memory book.
"The training is to enable them to write their
own memory books, with technical support from
the national secretariat," says Swak official Susan
Ndung'u.
"We hope that the Memory Book will soon be a
common feature with families infected and
affected by the pandemic," she adds.
The initiative also hopes to ease the burden
parents feel when they have to disclose their positive
HIV status to the children, and prepare them
and their children for permanent separation.
Parents and children communicate better, says
Wahome, hence enabling them to prepare for
death.
Trainers cite sensitising one's relatives to assist
in writing the book as one of the most difficult
issues.
In training, parents are taught about the various
issues they can cover in the book, like the family
history and aspirations.
"The parents, too, get to understand the importance
of making a valid will after being taught
how to go ahout it," says Wahome.
"Name has heen changed 1oproieci idel1lily
