Sunday Nation/ November 9, 2003                                                     • LifesTYLE •                                                                                                               11
                                                                                                                                ..
                       ~~~---_                                                                                                    _---------_.
                                                                                                     Eve is the new queen of rap                                                                                       >
                                                                                                           By A Correspondent                                                    She ended up working with a col-
                                                                                                                                                                                 lage of industry heavies, including
                                                                                                                                                                                 Dr Ore, DMX and R&B singer
                                                                                                                is African-American star                                            More recently Eve, who regu-
                                                                                                                new rap queen has
                                                                                                     A                                                                           Stevie J., Trina, Da Brat and the
                                                                                                                arrived on the scene. She
                                                                                                                                                                                 Marley family.
                                                                                                       Eve Jihan Jeffers, popularly
                                                                                                                                                                                 larly appears on DStv's MTV
                                                                                                       known merely as Eve. With
                                                                                                                                                                                 Channel, was afll10unced as part
                                                                                                      recent hit songs Who is That
                                                                                                                                                                                 of the Destiny's Child tour,
                                                                                                       Girl? and Let me Blow Your
                                                                                                                                                                                 including performances by Jessica
                                                                                                       Mind with Gwen Stefani, Eve has
                                                                                                                                                                                 Simpson, Nelly, and 3LW.
                                                                                                       been tearing up the charts with
                                                                                                                                                                                    She grew up listening to the
                                                                                                     - the kind of ease usually reserved
                                                                                                                                                                                 golden oldies of rap: Salt-N-Pepa, A
                                                                                                       for her male counterparts.
                                                                                                                                             Eve: Who's that girl?               MC Lyte, Queen Latifah and
                                                                                                          Eve, who was born in Philadel-
                                                                                                                                                                                 Slick Rick, but she says they had
                                                                                                       phia, Pennsylvania, in 1979, has     also had Erykah Badu singing.
                                                                                                                                                                                 no effect on her current sound_
                                                                                                       been rapping since she was in           Though Eve had success with
                                                                                                                                                                                 Eve has a great touch with lyrics,
                                                                               Photo/Anthony Njagi     high school. She landed a great      the single of her first album         thanks to years of creating poetry
                                                                                                       gig, singing the rap verse in The    called, Gotta Man, she was better
The Moi University Choir presents a zilizopendwa song at the Eldoret West Campus.                      Roots; 1999 Grammy Award-            known as the female element of        in Philadelphia's toughest
                                                                                                      winning single, You Got Me, that                                            neighbourhoods.
                                                                                                                                             hardcore rap group Ruff Ryders.
A great show                                                                                                                                                                      '}
scuttled in                                                                    What Drives You
                                                                                     lfIIII1""'"
day of shame             By ANTHONY NJAGI
                     onths of meticulous preparations went up in smoke
 M                 when rowdy students broke up the annual Moi Uni-
                   versity Festival of Arts. The rioting, on t,he first day,
                   prematurely ended the festival last Thursday. Every-
                   thing was just getting into gear, when the students
 threw decency and decorum out of the window, causing mayhem in
 Eldoret Town and on the university's other campuses.
     And, with the cancellation, went all the time, money and prepara-
 tions for the staging of plays, poetry and other theatrical
 performances.
     "'This is disappointing,"   cried a theatre arts student who sought
 anonymity, fearing the wrath of the hooligans.
     Before the abrupt end, only a few teams had performed on the
  university's Eldoret West Campus. The event had started with a brief
 speech by Eldoret Mayor Jonah Maiyo, followed by performances by
  the Moi University Choir, Creative Arts Department students and a
  Luhya traditional dance group, Makale Band. A colourful procession
  through the town was next, followed by a vigorous Nandi folk dance
  by Mosoriot Teachers' College.
     Moi University Choir entertained the guests with Zilizopendwa
   (golden oldies). Conducted by Melitus Wanyama, the choir proved its
   mettle with a good harmony of voices, instruments and choreography.
      Student Irene Choge presented a poem on HIV/Aids, cautioning
   youth against getting involved in sex with older people for money.
      A demonstration     of martial arts and the'tug-of-war were next. It
   was then that some students started demonstrating their expertise in
   the negative arts of stone throwing and looting.
      The chairman, Dr L.P. Barasa, and the other organisers met later in
   the evening and called off the event. The other members of the team
   are Basil Okong'o, Dr Joyce Agalo, Evans Mugarizi, Christopher
    Odhiambo, and Dr Okumu Bigambo.
  Marks.Cor-sex scandal
  The cancellation denied the people of Eldoret a chance to watch
  shows by top contemporary          dance troupes Kayamba Africa and
  Cheche. The Presbyterian Church of East Africa's Eastleigh drama
  group would have performed The Scourge, a play about a university
  professor who infects students with HIV in a marks-for-sex scandal.
      At the Grand Regency Hotel, Nairobi, there will be fun all day on
  November 15, during the Swissgarde National Conference. Various
   troupes from Nairobi will entertain the guests, Swissgarde distribu-
   tors, with dances and theatrical skits. To grace the shows will be Mr
   Kenya 2003, Lee Lihanda, and Swissgarde founder and chairman Lou
   Bayhack.
       Swissgarde East Africa Marketing Manager Valerie Egger told
   prizes to be won by the lucky few."
    Lifestyle: "'We're promising lots of fun for everyone, recognition and                                                                         .Going 'the distance!
       Among-the prizes are a brand new Toyota Rav4 and return tickets
    to tourist resorts in Florida, US, and the Bahamas. The entrance fee                                                              Cattex Delo 400 Multigrade has superior capabilities to provide fuel
    will be Sh500. Tickets are available at Swissgarde depots. The theme
    is Find Out flow to Improve.Y our Lifestyle,                                                                                     economy, lower oil consumption, prevent soot damage and extend
       Meanwhile, Heartstrings Kenya's performance of Ola Rotimi's                                                                   diesel engine life.With Delo 400, your engine willgo further ~etween
    play, The Gods Are Not to Blame, directed by Victor Ber, continues
    at the Kenya National Theatre.                                                                                                    oil drain intervals without topping up. Caltex Delo 400 Multigrade is
       Kakamega High School will perform their award-winning play, Re-
    striction, on political manipulation by Oliver Minishi on Wednesday                                                               definitely the diesel engine oilfor those who want to "kaa masaa".
   at Mumias Sugar Complex, drama teacher Tsuma Chris says.
     At the same lime. St Peters M.umias High School is preparing for a
  cultural extravaganza to be held on November 20.
     At the Goethe Institut, thc Kenya Art Exhibition continues until
  November 13. The' event is presented by the artists of Studio '/1,7 -
   Mbuthia Maina, Eric Maina and Michael Mbai.
   tony jagi(Qihot/1U1i
                      I.com
Page 


-------------------Trial Version-----------------------

Convert PDF to Text Desktop Software.

Copyright Convertpdftotext.net 2014.

To remove these lines, please activate your software from http://www.convertpdftotext.net/buynow.htm

-------------------------------------------------------
