                                                                                                    • LifeSTYLE •                                                                                                                                                                                                13
   nities with
   gospel tunes                                                                  Members of the US·based Kenyan gospel group, Milele, perform during a past homecoming concert ill Nairobi.
                             By FRED ORIDO
                         nited States-based Kenyan gospel group Milele has
                         embarked on a tour of various states in America.
                         Since July, the group has been holding conceits to
                         market their newly-launched album, Level Up.
                         They opened their performances with a show at
                         the Little Country Church and Simbafrique Bash in
                         northern California. The group is currently
     performing in Massachusetts. According to Harry Mwaurah, the
     Milele information officer, they will have covered 23 states by the
     end of the month. Milele has been well received wherever they have
.1   performed, leaving behind many new fans ..
  ;     "And we have seen the success of our evangelising efforts when
   " many young people have committed their lives to waiting for the
     partner that God has set aside for them," says Kanji Mbugua, who
     spoke to Lifestyle recently when the group was on holiday in Kenya.
        The other members of Milele are Kaima Mwati and Christian
     Kiarie Mungai.
        Just like their debut album, Forever, Level Up has catchy beats and
     is worth listening to from start to finish.
        "It is an eclectic musical buffet that testifies the uniqueness of our
     flavoured ministry," says Kanji.
        The album, which is being distributed by No Doubt Records (a
     Christian division of EMI), has 15 tracks. The songs are Journey,
   Afrique, Love You Lord, Wodee, Live Again, Turn it Around, For
   You, Faya, and Open Your Eyes.
     Others are Runnin', Coming Home, Set Free, Ngai, and A New                                                                                                                                      HP recommencIs MiclOsoff Windows- XP Professional for Business.
   Day. The song, Open Your Eyes, pleads with youth to lead morally
   upright lives and warns that the HIV pandemic could wipe out the
   entire youth population if they refuse to open their eyes.
   Prepare the listener
   And, For You has a straight-up gospel message laid into syncho-
   beats. It is meant to prepare the listener psychologically to have
   dialogue with God. The songs, Set Free and Ngai (Kikuyu for God),
   delve into man's poor relations with God. They, however, encourage
   listeners and other believers to seek God's help whenever they are
   troubled.
       Generally, the songs in Level Up are heavily inspired by the read-
 ~ ings of the Bible tho~gh they are presente? in an eclectic rang~ of
   music - reggae, Latm pop, Congolese Lmgala, Zouk, Amencan
   hip-pop and ballads infused with African sounds and rhythms.
       Milele was formed in the late 1980s, and many a fan in the United,
    States and Kenya find the group exciting to listen to because of its
    rich blend of East African gospel pop and urban contemporary
    music.
       The members had an ear for music while in high school. Both
    Kanji and Mwaurah        attended Nyeri Baptist· High School while
    Christian and Kaima went to Kijabe High and St Mary's School,
    Nairobi, respectively.
       They surprisingly l!nked up i~ ~s Angeles in 1998 when they
    went to study in Amenca. Their smgmg grad~~lly ?ec~m~ the talk of
    Christians in the state and they started recelVmg mVItatlOns to per-
    form in churches in Los Angeles.
    Study in America
    Milele averages 70 conce~s annual~y,mai~ly in churches and school~.
    As a mark of appreciation of their mUSIC,the young and energetIc
      enyans have shared the stage with gospel legends such as Andre
      rouch and Helen Baylor .
..
 '     To keep in touch with home and their falpilies, members of the
    Milele group make at least one mission trip a year to Kenya during
    which they perform several concerts.
       "We expect to relaunch our Level Up album in Nairobi in Decem-
    ber " says Mwaurah.
       They also expect to redo performances on their debut album, For-
     ever. The album features songs such as Narrow, Tucheze Ngoma,
     Love So Right, Hold On, Sanjoloma, and The Highway.
       Mwaurah says the group has great dreams they hope to realise
     back home. One of their grand missions is to establish a multi-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  "
     purpose recreational facility in Kenya. The gospel musicians are
    U'1ink.ingabout a venue with a 40,OOO-seat uditorium to be used for
                                              a
                                                                                         FOR DETAilS Of YOUR NEAREST HP RESELl£R:
    church services and concerts.                                                                               .lcQ +254
       To attract many young people, the facility will also have a sports                CAll HP East                                   20 271 6111 C\.ICKWW'W.hp.com/africa
  . gymnasium, music studios and a school. And, having witnessed the
 " effect of drug abuse on youth, Milele do not see a complete centre if                 @2003 Hewlet-!'ackord Development Company. LP. All rights •• ~. Intel, Pentium, Intel Inside ond the Intelln~de Icgo are I1<Ic!emori<.Of regillefecl trodemarb   of Intel CoJporolion   Of" ••   wbsic:liories in the
                                                                                         United S""'" ""d other~.      Mi"""* ond W'.ncJ- are regi>lered trodemo •••• 01Microsoft COtpOI'Ution.
    it will not have a drug rehabilitation centre and an Aids orphanage.                                                                                                                                                                                                                   l'\llllicis .1MB 1609
       "We are honoured and humbled by the fact that God has chosen
     us to sing, praise and glorify his name," Mwaurah says.
Page 


-------------------Trial Version-----------------------

Convert PDF to Text Desktop Software.

Copyright Convertpdftotext.net 2014.

To remove these lines, please activate your software from http://www.convertpdftotext.net/buynow.htm

-------------------------------------------------------
