Daily Nation I Friday, F{~bruary 21, 2003                                                                                                                                                                                27
                                                                                                                                                                           www.africa.barclays.com
          Dividend
          Two interim dividends of Shs 3 per share each were paid on 11 October and 11 December 2002 respectively. Subject to the approval of shareholders, the directors have resolved to recommend to members
          at the forthcoming Ar nual General Meeting a final dividend for the year of Shs 6 per share to be paid on or about 25 April 2003 to shareholders registered at the close of business on Thursday 20 March
          2003. The Register of members will be closed for one day on Friday 21 March 2003.
          Bonus share issue
          The Directors have also resolved to recommend to members at the forth coming Annual General Meeting the issue of bonus shares subject to all the relevant approvals being obtained. at the rate of ONE
          fully paid share of Shs 10 each for every TEN such shares held. The new shares will not qualify for the dividends for the year ending 31 December 2002.
          Annual General Meet:ng
          Notice is hereby giver that the twenty third Annual General Meeting of shareholders of Barclays Bank of Kenya Limited will be held at the amphitheatre, Kenyatta International Conference Centre, on Friday
          25 April 2003.
          Message from the Oil ectors
          The above balance sh ~et and profit and loss account extracts from the bank's financial statements approved by the Board of Directors on 20 February 2003. The financial statements have been audited by
          PriceWaterhouseCoopers and have received an unqualified opinion.
          A full set of these fin< ncial statements will be available at our registered Office at Barclays Plaza for inspection after approval by members at the Annual General Meeting.
          By order of the Board
          R.M.] Onyancha (Mrs'
          Company Secretary.
          Extracts from Chairman's statement
          Financial Review
          Total income grew b) 2% from Shs 11,262 million in 2001 to Shs 11.464 million in 2002. Net interest income declined from Shs 6,771 million to Shs 6.389 million in 2002 mainiy due to the lower interest
          rate environment. However the decrease in net interest income was offset by growth in non interest income of 13.7% to Shs 5,105 million as a result of our continued focus to grow non interest income.
          Focus on cost management continued to remain one of our key objectives in 2002 leading to non recurring restructuring costs of Shs 1,419 million during the year. This enabled us to successfully
          implement several ccst saving initiatives such as centralization of bank processing activities, reorganization of structure within our branch network and streamlining of our administrative and support
          overheads. Going for 'Vardit should be noted that the benefits from restructuring costs coupled with growth in non interest income will improve our cost income ratio and also enable us to operate in a low
          interest rate environrnent.
                                                                               manv of our customers faced severe financial difficulties. As a result our provisions for impairment losses on loans and advancesgrew
          from Shs 1,037 milli(n in 2001 to     S,     ,mt Ion III          ~
          bank's continued effc rts to clean the existing book. Non-performing advances as a proportion of total advances deteriorated during the year to 15% compared to 13.5'%the previous year.
           Group profit before tnation declined by 39.8% from 2001 level of Kshs 4,235 million to Kshs 2,550 million in 2002. Earnings Per Share were Shs 10.00, Return on Shareholders Funds was 179% while Return
           on Assets stood at 2.1%. The decrease in profits was mainly due to lower interest rate regime, heavy restructuring costs amounting to Shs 1,419 million (2001: Shs496 millionl, and increased provisions
           cha~ge. Adjusting fOI non recurring restructuring costs, profit before tax is Shs 4,255 million which is 13.5% below that of 2001..
           Our capital base rerrains strong, well in excess of the statutory minimum capital requirements. The directors have recommended a final dividend of Shs 6 per ordinary share, which combined with the   two
           interim dividends of Shs 3 per share each, brings total dividends to Shs 12 per ordinary share. In addition, the directors have recommended a bonus issue of 1:10 ordinary shares of Shs 10 each to
           complement the casl, dividend.
           Transforming our business
           The continuing changes in the market place calls for financial institutions to reinvent themselves. We have embraced this change and are making progress to provide our customers with world-class
           products and services. During the year. we recruited a number of experienced bankers to support the Corporate sector. This team is focusing on the key growth areas of the economy such as agriculture.
           manufacturing and t'1e public sector. We also introduced Asset Finance, giving our customers alternative financing solution for capital expenditure.
           Our Retail function I lUnched Telephone Banking during the last quarter of the year. This unique service was a first for the Kenyan market and led the way in opening up a new banking channel for our
           cu~10mers. Telephor e Banking provides 24hour Banking at the touch of a button. The expansion of Prestige banking services continued in upcountry branches. New Prestige centers were opened in Kisumu,
           Nakuru, Mombasa and Eldoret and they have all been a great success.
           Going forward, Retail banking will also focus on the small and medium sized segment. This programme will introduce Husiness Customer Advisors, who will provide efficient, professional and friendly
           support to help our :ustomers grow their businesses. We are also forming Business Clubs, led by Business Development Managers who will offer specific advice and guidance on complex business issues,
           give regular seminar; on best business practices and provide opportunities for customers to network with other Club Members.
           Social responsibility
           At Barclays, we are (ommitted to the ideal of making a difference in the communities in which we do business. The Barclays community support programme is one of the biggest in the world. We do not
           see our social responsibilities as conflicting with business objectives; neither do we see them as add-on. Supporting the wider community helps to define who we are and how we differ from our
           competitors .•
           We are actively invo ved in community support activities, whose broad aims are to have a clear, lasting and beneficial impact on the local community and to encourage personal involvement by our staff.
           In Kenya, we have d('veloped partnerships with community organizations such as The Association of People living with Aids (TAPWAK), African Medical Research Foundation (AMREF). Association of the
           Physically Disabled i1 Kenya (APDK), The Kenya Red Cross Society, and The Aga Khan Foundation among others.
           We are passionate a Jouf the communities in which we live and work. Our community tocus is on public health (HIV and AIDS), education and the disadvantaged, including people with disabilities. Last year,
           staff raised a stagge 'ing Kshs 12.5 million through the popular Barclays Charity Walk, an annual event that has grown tremendously with support from our customers. family and friends. The money raised
           has benefited over f 0 organisations across the country, such as: Maseno School for the Deaf: Tumaini Home for AIDS orphans in Mombasa: Missionaries of Charity; Eldoret School for the Mentally
           Handicapped, and the renovation of the Cancer Ward at the Kenyatta National Hospital. During the year, Barclays contributed Shs. 32 million to community activities.
           I would like to persc nally thank our staff tor the commitment they have shown in community activities and encourage them to keep it up.
           Looking forward
           Following the peaceful elections in December 2002, and in view of the new government's initiatives to address the structural issues underlying poor economic performance, I am optimistic that the
           economy will regist'~r some improvement in the second half of 2003. We believe that the new government is committed to move quickly to restore donor and investor confidence to ensure resumption of
           donor funding from the iMF, World Bank and bilateral partners. The restoration of investor confidence, coupled with initiatives to improve public sector services will boost economic growth in the medium
           term, and provide u; with the platform to build on our satisfactory 2002 results. HarcJayshas a robust strategy. sound values and a strong team. It is well positioned for the future.
           Finally. I would like 10 take this opportunity to thank my fellow Board members and staff for their dedicated support and commitment throughout the year.
           Sam Ambundo
           CHAIRMAN.
                                                                                                                                                                BARClAYS
Page 


-------------------Trial Version-----------------------

Convert PDF to Text Desktop Software.

Copyright Convertpdftotext.net 2014.

To remove these lines, please activate your software from http://www.convertpdftotext.net/buynow.htm

-------------------------------------------------------
