Daily Nation! Friday, September 26,2003
                                             Total Kenya HIV/Aids Activities
                                           DISCUSSION (Photo 1)                                                                       .
                                           Mr. Lamine KANE (right), Managing Director, Total Kenya in discussion with Dr. William Kiarie of Crystal
                                           Hill Consulting Limited (left) and Mary Wangechi (centre) who is HIV positive and working with Kenya
                                           Network of Women with Aids (KENWA) during the Total Kenya HIV/AIDS day held at Kenya School of
                                           Monetary Studies recently.
                                           Dubbed "Be Alive", the day was set aside to create awareness about HIV/AIDS to staff and families of Total
                                           Kenya and was marked with songs, poems, workshops and games. Selected people living with HIV/AIDS
                                           were invited to the occasion and narrated their experiences on how they coped with the disease.
                                           PRESENTATION (Photo 2)
                                           Mr. Lamine KANE (left) Managing Director, Total Kenya presents clothes, shoes and other goods donated by
                                           staff of Total Kenya to Imani Children's Home that caters for rehabilitated orphans during the Total Kenya
                                           HIV/AIDS day held at Kenya School of Monetary Studies recently.
                                          PEER EDUCATORS (Photo 3 )
                                          Peer Educators have been recognized as important agents of behaviour change in the ~orkplace and some
                                          Total Kenya staff members volunteered to be Peer Educators within the Company ...
                                          The Peer Educators took a three days training whose objectives were to create more awareness on HIV/AIDS
                                          on the trainees, equip them with information and skills necessary for behaviour modification, give them basic
                                          counseling skills, provide them with relevant communication skills.
                                          The Peer Educators champion HIV/AIDS activities at Total Kenya, amongst other things : they are involved
                                          in the provision of HIV/AIDS information, encourage staff to undergo Voluntary Counseling and Testing,
                                          condom distribution and support of community outreach programmes. The ratio of Peer Educators to
                                          employees in Total Kenya is 1: 15. Peer Educators' training was once again organized by Crystal Hill
                                          Consulting Limited
                                          CERTIFICATE       (Photo 4)
                                          Mr. Wellington Godo (left), Permanent Secretary at the Ministry of Health presents a Certificate of
                                          Participation to Christine Wambui of Kenya Network for Women with Aids (KENWA) during the Total Kenya
                                          HIV/AIDS Day. Looking on is Mr. Lamine KANE (middle) Managing Director, Total Kenya Limited.
                                          TRAINING (Photo 5)
                                          On 15th May, 2003, Total Kenya began a HIV/AIDS training programme for its 276 employees. A week
                                          earlier, Senior Managers had undergone a half-day sensitization programme. Crystal Hill Consulting, a
                                           HIV/AIDS consultancy firm that offers training and programme support to cqIllpanies facilitated the training.
                                            The Total Kenya HIV/AIDS training programme was heavily weighted towards awareness creation, stigma
                                              reduction and behaviour change. The training was based on experiential learning and included games,
                                                 role."play,group discussions, demonstrations and t~1ks.All employees received the One Day training
                                                   very positively.
                                                           1st International Women's Aids Run
                                                          Total Kenya Limited was very proud to be recognized as the main oil company that sponsored
                                                          over 30 lady employees to the Women's Aids Run on Saturday, 20th September, 2003 which
                                                          was aimed "For Women, About Children, Against Aids". TotalKenya is also happy to be asso-
                                                          ciated with ICASA 2003, the 13thInternational conference on AIDS and STIs in Africa that is
                                                          currently t~ng place in Nairobi. Total Keny" exhibiting at theon-going ICASA HIV/AIDS
                                                          Conference to share with others their HIV/AIDS workplace programme.
Page 


-------------------Trial Version-----------------------

Convert PDF to Text Desktop Software.

Copyright Convertpdftotext.net 2014.

To remove these lines, please activate your software from http://www.convertpdftotext.net/buynow.htm

-------------------------------------------------------
