The Sunday Nation. February 11,   2001.

From CHRIS ERASMUS
in CAPE TOWN

South African Aids activist Nkosi Johnson born HIV-positive, at 12 years of age, has had the
courage and tenacity to be the longest surviving become a symbol of hope for people living with
HIV and Aids around the world.Nkosi sprang to world prominence last year when he spoke.., eloquently and movingly, at the
World Aids conference held in Durban, South Africa.
Since then, his condition has deteriorated badly. Shortly before Christmas he collapsed and he has been in and out of consciousness, clinging to the fringes of life.
Even though he has for weeks been at a low point, desperately ill and barely able to move, the power of his courage and commitment to the message of hope, which he has embodied, has been undiminished.
While TV and sports stars last weekend celebrated his 12th birthday with his young school friends playing outside, Nkosi lay motionless in his bedroom in the Johannesburg suburb of Melville, not even able to clutch a stuffed toy tiger which lay alongside him. His tiny frame wracked with pain and desperately thin, it seemed impossible for Nkosi to live even another hour. But almost a week has dragged on by since then, and although there have been only intermittent and faint signs of improvement in his condition, he doggedly hangs on to the Inst threads of his young life.
Most of the time he is semicomatose, but every now and then his eyes - made extra large by his shrunken face - open and follow the movements of his foster mother, Gail Johnson.
ach swallowed sip of liquidised fruit has E become something to celebrate. a small victory in the face of the inevitable.
But through it all, his courage shineslike the brightest of lights.
He has even managed a few times to raise a skeletal hand and take the hand of his adoptive mother for a few seconds.
"I have reassured him that I will cope and his mommy (who died of an Aids-related illness) is waiting for him. He has seen his relatives and out his ordeal, says· she is at a loss to explain knows there is peace with them," Johnson told
reporters last week .Even she, who has been with Nkosi through Nkosi's tenacious will to stay alive since}le collapsed more than a month ago.Doctors say they can do no more for him and Nkosi has not been able to speak more than a ~ ...

weird or two since his collapse."He wakes up more often but does not speak any more." said Johnson ...
He has been lifted out of bed into a chair a few times but he cannot support his head or move on
his own. A full-time nurse is at his bedside, joined by volunteers, mostly close friends, and by Johnson
when she can manage it. Exhausted by the ordeal, Johnson somehow finds time and strength to play
him soothing classical music. It may seem a sad and ultimately futile process, but each breath Nkosi manages to take
against all the odds adds more momentum to his message, which is that there is hope and there is life, even in the face of a terrible and terminal illness.

He is unlikely to survive much longer in this encounter with the dreaded HIV invader that has

destroyed his immune system, but Nkosi's legac is certain to live on - and the power of that legacy is multiplied and extended with (each hou,each day he lives on ..It was his shining, happy face, filled With hop
and promise, that stood out amidst the silly political wrangling that was the background to the firs Above, Ms Gail Johnson (right) Nkosi'sadoptive mother, hugs Nkosi'sgrandmother Ruth Nkosi during a birthday party in honour of Nkosi (pictured in
painting), at his primary school in Johannesburg. Left, Nkosi speaking at Durban during the World Aids conference.
(picrnr.es courtesy of AP/TIME) supply HIV-positive mothers with anti-retroviral
drugs to protect their unborn children from the virus, Nkos' was winning hearts and minds ofpeople around the world.
Where, for many in developed nations, Aids.was seen as a tamed. if not beaten, monster, Nkosi showed that in developing nations and under privileged communities, it remains as deadly as the plague that devastated Medieval Europe centuries ago.
Beyond that message, which has galvanised celebrities' and people of influence from around the world to join in the struggle against Aids in
this part of the planet, Nkosi's power lay in his child's innocence and the hope that streamed from
his eyes and heart.children   from the same school while saddened that her adoptive and
W               now famous son could not play with
his Melpark Primary School pals which she initially had to fight to get him into because of the prejudice against Aids on the part of some of children's parents - Johnson was happy that the occasion of his 12th birthday was a celebration of his life, played out before the cameras and the media of the world.

Nkosi's relatives,  and other HIV-infected orphans from the Nkosi's Haven Aids care centre,

with whom Nkosi used to enjoy playing cops and robbers, attended the party, expected to be his last.

Beyond the grief of what appears to be his imminent death, Johnson says she and Nkosi are peace with his life and its impending end. "We chatted about death before he had the seizures," said Johnson. "He was worried about letting me down and about leaving me alone without, a partner to carry on the fight against Aids. I told World Aids conference held in Africa last year. I would miss him and no-one could take his place, but that I would go 'on and that I would While South African President Thabo Mbeki,
baeked by a clutch of Aids dissidents intent on manage."

'finding other causes to the disease than the Nkosi was born HIV-positive in Johannesburg
in 1989. At the time, relatively few children were
Human Immunodeficiency Virus, was dodging
the issue of mother-to-child transmission and the being born HIV-positive and the government was
refusal of the South African government to years away from takin!? the problem of Aids
                                                                                                                             