Saturday Nation September 29, 2001
WE MUST NOW MOVE BEYOND MAKING PLEDGES


By NICHOLAS ALIPUI

World Summit for Children in 1990, the world's leaders
ollowing its adoption by the United Nations in 1989, the
Convention on the Rights of the Child has shaped inter-
national consensus on a new vision for children. At the
made a promise to promote and uphold the rights enshrined in the
Convention. In this era of rights, we are no longer being asked to
pledge commitments to children but to fulfIll our obligations to
them according to the articles of the Convention.
In Kenya, the Convention is already inspiring and guiding
national policies, plans of action, legislation and other measures
aiming to promote child rights within the wider realm of human
rights, including the rights of women. However, in a world of
widening disparities and growing poverty, children in Kenya are
falling rapidly behind and deserve special attention. To combat
this, we need to develop a national aspiration for children's well
being which should guide all our efforts if we are to break the
cycle of transmission of poverty from generation to generation.
Admittedly, many important improvements in lives of children
and women in Kenya have occurred over the past several decades.
There has been a dramatic reduction in mortality and disability
from polio and a zero-case record since 1987, reflecting the success
of policies and programmes for children.
Overall, however, Kenya has fallen short of the goals of the
World Summit for Children, not because they were too ambitious
or technically beyond reach, but largely because of insufficient
investment. In absolute numbers, there are more children in
school than ever before but the fact is that almost 57 per cent of
children of school going age are not attending school.
Remarkably, there have been many dramatic declines in the
\ lives of children in the country in the last few years of the last

century. The number of infants and children dying before their

first and fifth birthdays has increased while maternal mortality
rati.os have remained stagnant. This is compounded by the rapidly
ragmg HIV and Aids pandemic which currently claims the lives of

78 Kenyan youth a day, and is devastating entire communities.
As such, Kenya today faces numerous challenges in both com-
pleting the. un?nished agenda of the last decade and addressing
new emergmg Issues.
While the efforts needed to accelerate improvements in the
lives of children in Kenya are within the reach of Kenyans them-
poverty cannot be achieved by a single agency, ministry or by
selves, it clear that the impetus we need to lift children out of

This is why Unicef is working with partners in government, in
government alone.

the private sector, with civil society and the media to help mobilise

a national movement for children as part of the Global Movement
for Children - a worldwide campaign to build a shared sense of
responsibility for the welfare and fulfIllment of the rights of every
child on earth ..


As we prepare for the UN Special Session on Children we ask
every Kenyan to stand up and be counted. In families, government
or corporations we ask them to show the world that they care


about children and are willing to action to protect, defend and
secure their rights. In the words of the Global Movement Cam-
paign slogan, we ask them to 'Say Yes for Children'.



Dr. Nicholas Alipui is the Unicef Kenya Country Representative.

The UN Special Session on Children was postponed following
the terrorist attack in New York.



HEALTH

A plus for immunisation


By JULIANA OMALE

In the past decade, it was widely acknowl-
edged that more effort was needed to make
certain development goals worthwhile for
children.
defIciencies.
In health terms the impact for children con-
tinues to be registered in disease prevention
and control, and reductions in micronutrient
Globally, the mid-decade immunisation goal
of 80 per cent coverage against diptheria, per-
tussis, tetanus (DPT), measles, poliomyelitis
and tuberculosis among children under one
year of age was achieved in 75 per cent of
targeted countries. Reported cases of polio-
myelitis declined from 23,000 in 1990 to 4,000
in 1997. The Americas succeeded in eradicat-
ing the disease.
In Kenya, the last recorded polio case was in
1994. UNICEF's Country Office Project
Officer, Health, Dr Agostino Munyiri, says
Kenya has been virtually polio free since
1997
But this status is compromised by the pres-
ence of wild polio in neighbouring countries
that are ravaged by political and social insta-
bility as well as constant cross-border human
traffic. Kenya can be given a clean bill of
health only when the region eradicates wild
polio strains. Hence the intensity of national
immunisation days since 1996.
These immunisation efforts achieved 90 per
cent coverage in 2000, compared to 80 per
cent in previous years.
Dr Munyiri says another recent development

that benefits the cause of Kenya's children is

the government's commitment to foot the
vaccine procurement bill.
"For the past three years, the government has

pledged to pay five per cent of the annual
child vaccines budget, which stands at US$ 2
million (about ShI56m)."
Although the country came close to 80 per
cent immunisation coverage of the six main
killers of children under two years by 1990,
"We noticed that coverage for measles
eradicating measles is still a challenge.

cent in 2000."
dropped from 80 per cent in 1994 to 71 per

Donor support to declined within the past

four years, but this may not be the reason for
the drop in coverage.
"The problem with the vaccination schedule
for measles is the six-month interval after the

fInal DPT vaccination when the infant is 14

weeks. Mothers seem to forget to return their
children when they turn nine months, proba-

bly due to communication        breakdowns

between them and health-workers," says Dr
Munyiri.

Meanwhile, two more vaccine schedules will

be introduced next month. There are Hepati-

tis Band Haemophilus Influenza antigens.
The first protects against development of

A health care worker administers anti-polio an
The debilitating disease has been yjrtually wi

liver cancer while the latter safeguards chil-
dren against pneumonia and meningitis,
which accompany influenza.

Although the vaccines are available, their

cost has been too prohibitive for the national
immunisation programme. The antigens will
be combined with the DPT schedule.

The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation has
channelled     seed
money to support
delivery,  through     In Kenya, the last reco
the Global Alliance
for Vaccines and       case was in 1994. Close
Immunisation

(GA VI). The alli-     cent coverage has been
ance aims at making

expensive vaccines     the six main kiUers of
widely accessible to

developing
countries.
Dr Munyiri says that although 25 per cent of
child immunisation in Kenya is handled by

the private sector (meaning there are clients

willing to pay) many mothers will not pay for
preventative health services.

"We need to create demand for vaccinations.

In some rural areas, we have established that
demand exists since communities report vac-

cine shortage and commit themselves to fuel-

ling a mobile health unit, as well as paying

health-workers for the duration of the servic-
es."

However,     an   immediate     challenge   is

managing costs and sustaining delivery of the
new vaccines. The cost butden is directly
linked to use of disposable injection packs.

Although the health policy is comfortable

with use of sterilisers, these are no longer in
vogue due to consumer pressure in the wake
of HIV IAIDS onslaught.

"We have found that both clients and health
I

rded polio

to 80 per


recorded for


children



workers are uneasy about reusing needles and
syringes, even if the correct sterilising proce-
dures are applied," says Dr Munyiri.

Disposable packs are not ~IY expensive but

they pose an environmental and public health
risk.

The GA VI facilitates dis 'bution of non-

recyclable syringe packs        th the new vac-
cines, but these cost six US cents each

(Sh4.70). The cost is prohibitive on the

national immunisation progtamme.

All in all, vaccines for children are an equita-
ble intervention      which proportionately
An A wefeature.
favours the poor.           -
