DAILY NATION, WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 28, 2001

MEN WHO HAVE BEEN MAKING A KILLING FROM THE BEREAVED ARE OUT OF WORK
WIDOW INHERITORS MEET THEIR MATCH

By CLAY MUGANDA Monica is not a popular
name in some circles of
Ukwala in Siaya District.
Among the more traditional
of the menfolk, Monica is not
just a woman's name, It represents a
flood sweeping away the stilts of tradition
from under their society,
St Monica Women's Group, an antiwidow
inheritance advocacy association,
is also threatening the livelihood
of a rare type of professional.
"We have no choice but to turn back
to our shambas as these people have
cut off our source of livelihood,"
laments Jack Adero, a widow
inheritor.
Adero, 57 and unmarried, used to
get paid for his services before the
rytonica group came into being. His
futies then entailed /oko ot (building a ceremonial hut for the widow) and
spending a night with her in the
newly-built hut.
; The jotero . or professional widow
inheritors, can demand up to
Sh 15,000, plus cattle, to cleanse a
widow.
Among the Luo, who predominantly
occupy the area, it is taboo for
an un-inherited widow to enter anyone's
homestead. If she does, she is
not allowed to enter any of the houses
in the compound.
Should a widow die ·before being
inherited, her brothers-in-law are
barred by custom from digging her
grave. They are also barred from
building another dwelling for her
should the one her husband left her
collapse. These beliefs bar close relatives
from helping widows who
choose not to be inherited.
Most jotero sponge on well-to-do
widows. Adero admits that jotero take
advantage of this ritual to pitch camp
in the widow's homestead -- at her
expense. Thus their resentment for
Monica.
The group has been filling the void
left by relatives who desert uninherited
widows for fear of offending
custom and tradition.
"Had it not been for Monica, I could
have perished during the E/ Nino
rains," says Agnes Abonyo, the
group's co-chairman. "My husband
left me in a crumbling hut as our
resources had been spent on his medication.
My brothers-in-law regarded
me as an outcast after I refused to be
inherited and would not come to my
rcscue," she says.
The group built a hut for her.
Monica, which was initially associated
with older widows when it started
ofTwith 15 members, is now attracting
young [Christian) widows and even
men. Of the 254 members, 68 are
male.
Mary Amollo, the group's chairman,
says membership is open to
Christians, and not necessarily
widows.
"Surprisingly, men started joining
as tim..: went by," says Amollo. "This
has increased the membership to
include widowers who also dislike the
cleansing rituals they go through when
they lose their wives," she adds.
Initially, widows were ridiculed by
traditionalists, but the group has defied
all the odds to step in and help members
protect their propcrty and stave off harassment
from "professional" inheritors.
Bertha Anyango, 62, confesses that
she joined Monica because she could
not stand the idea of another man in her
life.
"Some of these inheritors are drunks
and spread malicious rumours about
one's family when their demands are
not met," says the grandmother of four.
She was widowed in 1996.
Monica's efforts in curbing widow
inheritance have curtailed inheritors'
behaviour of reaping where they did not
sow, says Charles Odhiambo, a Busiabased
policeman whose father died early
this month. He says: "As much as I
would not like to interfere with my
mother's life, I will not stand any goodfor-
nothing old man trying to interfere
with her Iife just because she is
widowed."
But it has not been smooth sailing for
Monica. Some of the group's fiercest
critics have been women whose
daughters-in-law joined Monica. They
accuse the Monica women of brainwashing
young widows in order to get
their unmarried brothers to marry them.
Supporters of inheritance say the group
is responsible for the runaway spread of
HIV/Aids in the region.
"It is better to be inherited and infect
one person than to refuse and keep a
string of boyfriends who could all end
up getting infected," observes Owit
Luoland, a professional inheritor who
was expelled from the division.
Owiti earned the Luoland name
because of his widow-inheritance
exploits in distant areas when Monica's
clout made Ukwala ajotero-free area.
With its continued popularity, Monica
now admits even couples as members.
Membership is free, but during the
weekly meeting-cum-prayer sessions,
each member contributes at least Sh20
for a rainy day.
"Considering the level of poverty
here, we cannot peg the amount higher
as most of our members are either
unemployed or are only petty traders,"
says Sabina Odipo, the group's
treasurer.
One in every two people in Siaya cannot
afford a meal a day, according to the
First Report on Poverty in Kenya. More
than half of the women are absolutely
poor. II The district has a large number of
female-headed households and most
women are illiterate. Because of cultural
inhibitions, women cannot make important
decisions. Their participation in big
business ventures is greatly hampered,
further worsening their poverty.
Odipo says that despite all the hardships
they could face, the group has to
stay because "widow inheritance has
been abused and has no place in the
modem societv and in the era of HIV/
Aids. We are trying to prevent the
spread of the scourge by encouraging
young widows to join us and shun the
jotero," she adds.
"Widow inheritance involving sexual
acts is very risky in the district, where
the HIV-prevalence is higher than the
national average," warns Tom Onyango,
the Siaya District Aids and STD Coordinator.
One in every three people in Siaya is
believed to be infected with HIV,
according to statistics at the local district
hospital.
Onyango says that even when widows
consent to be inherited for cultural reasons,
inheritors still insist on sexual
relations.
Luo women, two-year study by
Kenya Oral Literature Association and).');
Interlink Rural Information service'Mfeel '";o,,,I!
that widow inheritance is larg
responsible for the escalating sprea
HIV/Aids. As a cultural practice, it h
been compromised by the increase in
sexually transmitted infections and has
. therefore outl ived its usefulness.
The study says that widows view
their economic situation as tragic since
they cannot provide adequate care, food
clothing and school fees for their children
as they should only be inherited if
the sole aim is providing a solution to
their economic hardship.
The widow inheritors hardly fit in the
13.1 per cent bracket of rural men who
know about HIV/Aids and have ever
been tested. The 1998 Kenya Demographic
and Health Survey states that in
Nyanza Province, 63.3 per cent of the
men know about condoms while only
16.7 per cent are willing to pay (a maximum
of Sh5) for them.