Daily Nation! Wednesday, October 10, 2001

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 1
TRAPPED INTO A POISONOUS UNION

she married, she says: "When we met, I thought I was safe with him."
Now, she was learning otherwise.
"I had seen that he was reckless and challenged him about his lifestyle.
I told him I knew he was infected with some terrible disease then
informed him that I was going to be tested, and if I was HlV positive, I
would go public to expose him and save the many women he took
advantage of."
It is one thing to suspect that you may be HlV positive. It is quite
another to be told to your face by your sexual partner of 12 months that
he was HIV positive when he met you.
"Yes, when I married you I had it (HlV). Were you blind not to
see?" he asked, rubbing salt into her wounds.
She realised she was just a statistic on his scorecard of victims. "I was
bitter and cried for a long time."
"That night," Atieno continues, "he beat me. He
beat me hard and brutally, then packed up and left me
lying on a cold floor, bleeding, alone with my
daughter."
It is a poor neighbourhood, and when her husband
left her carrying their bed, their paraffin stove, their
kitchen utensils, his clothes and hers, Atieno had nothingleft.
She was hurt and could not move. A neighbour
looked in and helped her to a health centre, where her
wounds were dressed before she went to report her
assault to the police post in Kinyango, Dandora.
The injuries of her last night with her husband still
weigh Atieno down. She cannot work any more,
because her neck cannot take the long hours of stand- /
ing as she plaits customers' hair. ••
Her chest still aches and she has a rapture in one of LAUGHTER: Mr Klmanthl
her eardrums. The X-ray examination confirmed to her
that the end of her working life had come.
The police were forthright, and asked her if she wanted him taken to
court and charged, or if she preferred to get her things back first. She
was desperate, caring for a four-year-old child, and with nowhere to
turn. She chose to have the stove, the bed, and the clothes first.
So when the police pursued the man to his workplace, he released
the things she needed to survive. He was freed, perhaps with the expectation
that the couple would sort out the assault case Kenyan style -
by ignoring it.
Atieno's husband made friendly overtures, first sending emissaries to
see her, and then going to see Atieno's relatives about a reconciliation.
Yet, in her mind, his admission replayed like a stuck record: "Yes, I
knew I had Aids and that I was going to die but that it would be after
10 years. What I did I knew and I am still going to do it to someone else
just like I did to you."
She knew that she had to find out the truth for herself. She went to
hospital for an Aids test. The first test result at the Kenyatta National
Hospital was positive ..
"My first thought was 'I don't want to die!'" Atieno remembers. She
went for re-testing at the Kenya Medical Research Institute, and the
truth would not change. It was time to start accepting reality, but all the
pre-test and post-test counselling could not prepare her for the shock
she had to deal with.
"When I got that result, I bought many tablets [two varieties of
over-the-counter drugs] and took them, intending to die. I fell into a
deep sleep and heard a voice telling me to go for payers."
"For a long time, I was in denial. I was too young to have Aids, but I
also had the test result that said I was infected. I joined the church for
encouragement."
In the tough Dandora district, where vice and religion thrive side by
side, being sick, unemployed and with a child can be a heavy burden.
But Atieno has fallen back on the support of her friends and relatives.
"I want to carry on living but I am ill and I have no money," Atieno
adds.
She, like many women in Dandora, Kayole, Kibera and many other
low-income urban areas, do no know how to discuss Aids when it hits
the family. Many. would rather not discuss it, let alone go public about
their status. Yet, going public can make the difference between living
another five years and dying after a few months.
"Patients die faster because of secrecy," says Dr Mohammed Abdallah,
the chairman of the National Aids Control Council. "Their stress,
flu and other opportunistic infections go untreated because they are
afraid to go public. Kenya may not need retro-viral drugs if people
suffering from Aids are open about it," he adds.
Atieno has recorded all her experiences in a notebook. It is her way
of coming to terms with her reality. She says she is glad her relatives did
not shun her when she told them about her HIV status, but adds that
her friends took it differently.
Her husband has never been comfortable with her publicising her
HlV status. She claims that he has taken her Aids test
result and other important papers so that she has no
proof of her status.
When she tells friends that she is HIV positive, they
first go to talk among themselves, then return to ask:
"If you are HIV positive, how can you admit it?"
"When I show them my test results, they just break
down and cry," she says.
Marriages were never meant to be what Atieno
claims hers turned out to be - a highway to the
grave, a death trap.
So she is angry, and in the heat of her anger, she
voices homicidal thoughts.
Once, her husband reported her to the Buru Buru
police station, alleging that she had threatened to kill
.him. She was summoned to the station, and went with
a case of her own - she wanted to report that she
had been infected with HIV.
That is a case the police do not know how to deal
with (see separate story below). Without proof, says police spokesman
Peter Kimanthi, it would be difficult to press charges. If it was assault,
they could understand that, but not infe,ction with Aids.
Yet, Elizabeth is a bewildered woman. She cannot understand why
the President's suggestion, that people who intentionally infect others
with HIV be hanged, has not been effected.
Even at the Kenya Network of Women with Aids, campaigner
Asunta Wagura says the legal issues surrounding HIV and Aids are
largely still unresolved. She hopes they can refer Atieno's case to the
Federation of Women Lawyers in Kenya (Fida), where the alleged
harassment and assault case can be pursued from.
Whatever recourse is found for Atieno, it is unlikely to take away
hers bitterness. It springs from the things she says her husband told her:
"Have you heard that anyone has bee.n arrested for infecting another
person with HlV?"
Again, she breaks into tears, and as you hold her hand, trying to
reassure her that this is not the end of the world, to explain that the
President only made a suggestion that will take years to become law, it
occurs to you that she is inconsolable. You can only calm her down and
hear her through. There is no bairn sufficient to soothe her pain, no
words soothing enough to ease her misery. Her spirit is unsettled, and it
wanders, refusing to be consoled.
It is her life, and she sees it - in her mind's eye - coming to an
abrupt and sudden end before she has accomplished any of the things
she dreamt of doing. She thinks of her father, and when she speaks
about him, another flood of tears washes her cheeks.
One may be counselled to accept their status, but Atieno says: "He
will not give me my life back. My daughter will be left all alone.
"Even if I am compensated in millions, it will not soothe my heart. It
will not give me back my life. It will not help me."
"Should moneyed people do as they wish? Don't the poor have any
rights?" ,
It is a question whose answer is still blowing in the wind.