WE'LL FIGHT BACK, SAYS CHURCH

BY GEORGE OMONSO AND AND DAVID MUGONYI

The Catholic Church and Muslim leaders
yesterday vowed to fight any effort
by the Government to encourage the use
of condoms.
They said abstinence was the only
means of fighting the spread of
HIV /Aids.
Kitale Catholic Bishop Maurice Crowley,
who is also the .vice-chairma~ of the
education in the Church said the
national condom policy was not a solution,
but only a psychological position of
safety, an escape from reality ..
Elsewhere, the director of the Musltm
Consultative Council, Mr Abdulrahaman
Wandati, said Islam does not condone
sex outside marriage.
"Condoms and sex outside marriage is
not in our agenda. Wayward sex is an
impediment to going to Heaven," he
said.
Catholic Archbishop Ndingi Mwana
a'Nzeki and the chairman of the Kenya
Episcopal Conference, Rev John Njue,
were among the first to oppose the
importation of 300 million condoms. The
two said it was a clear way of "promoting
promiscuity".
Bishop Crowley asked the Government
to strengthen guiding and counselling
in schools to e.nable the youth lead
upright and moral lives..
The cleric said the condom policy
would not be implemented in schools
sponsored by the Church.
"We wonder why the Government
does not consult other stakeholders like
the Catholic Church before passing such
policies," Bishop Crowl~y. said, adding
that it is only through gwdmg and cou~-
selling that the war against the pandemlc
could be won.
He said to encourage condom use
among the youths w~uld. be tan,tam01!nt
to encouraging proIntsculty and creatmg
a false sense of safety. Besides, he added,
condoms were not 100 per cent
perfect. .
But Anglican Archbish~p ~avld
Gitari said he will consult hiS bishops
when the policy is published.
Controversial Kitale Catholic priest Fr
Gabriel Dolan described government's
encouragement of the use of condoms as
"simplistic", saying the use of condoms
would not solve the Aids problem.
A day after the Govern~~nt
announced plans to import 300 mlllion
condoms, a group of youth~ d~monstrated
in the streets of Nauobl and
asked the authorities to utilise the
money on programmes to enc01!rage
Kenyans to be of good moral behavIOur.
The programmes, the youth observed,
should include:
• Erecting billboards promoting chastity
(sexual self control) as the one and only
100 per cent way of curbing the spread
of HIV/Aids and other sexually transmitted
infections.
• Promoting messages .in prin~ and
broadcast media encouragmg chastity
• Support and encourage or~anisations
and bodies that promote chastity
• Enact strict laws to monitor and keep
pornography away from the youth.