The Sunday Nation, February 18, 2001
NEW FACTS ON CIRCUMSCISION AND HIV VIRUS

By Lifestyle Correspondent
Thc HIV infection rate in Nyanza Province is very high because circumcision
in men there is not common, an inten'ational health journal says.
Thc infection rate is also high among the country's long-distance truck
drivcrs, it adds.
The Family Health International publicati'Ifi, Network. reports that a recent study
showed only one of eight health centres in the proviace had sufficient instruments and
supplies to perf0f!11safe circumcision. .. ". r
Thc quarterly Journal, supported m part by USaJd, says: In Klsumu and Ndola,
Zambia - where HIV prevalence ratcs are v~ry hIgh at 22 per cent and 26 pcr cent
respectively - circumcision is far less common (27 per cent and 8 per cent,
respectively)."
It adds: "Another recent study of the cffcet of circumcision on the acquisition of
HlV and other sexually transmittcd infcction~, co~ducted among some 7~0 Kenyan
truck drivers, found HIV infection rates to be iour times greater among unCIrcumcised
mcn than circumcised men."
The current journal, that focuses on famiy planning and .Sex~allr Transmittcd
Infections (STls), says that in a prospcctl\e . tudy conducted In Nlgena and Kenya
bdIVeen 1981 and 1998, II per cent of 249 circumcisions performed under sterile
contliti"ns by one qualified surgeon resulted il complications, although no complication
led to death or amputation .
In the same study, one of 50 patients treated for comphc~tlOns fo!I(:l\VIng~lrcum~lsion
performed by other surgeons (mostly mdlcally untramed tradItIOnal clrcumclsers)
died frum infection. Another seven of thc 50 suffered complete or partIal loss of
the penis .....
"l\lso. Uganda Muslims reported 111 a SUT' ~y that the same unstenhsed cutting
devicc was used for multiple male circumcisi,'n procedures, a major ris~ factor for
HIV transmission," the journal reports. It adds that even health profeSSIOnals may
not he prepared to perform safe circumcisions.
"An assessm~nt of acceptability ?f.1!1alecin::!":1cision among Luo men !In~ wome.n
in Nyanza Provmce and of the feasibIlIty of cn~nng the procedur~ m hyglemc condltion~
tiler.: showed that only one of eight health centres had suffiCient mstrumcnts and
supplies to perform a circumcision safely," it reports ....
111crisk of mv infection is high among unch cumcised men worldwldc, the Journ~1
says, adding that some 30 studies show circl,mciscd men are less likely than thclr
uncircumciscd counterparts to become infectcd I'ith mv.
Uncircumcised men may be more likely to Jevelop cancer of the penis, it says,
adding that in some countries, men arc askin~o be circumcised because they have
heard the procedure may reduce the~r risk ofHI\ infecti<?n..... However, while there IS eVldcnce to sUJ:)ort their behef, promotmg CIrcumCIsion
as a way to prevent the spread of I flV may not be appropriate.
"If health officials recommend circumcision to reduce HIV risks, some
men might incorrectly assume that cir"umcision offers excellent protection
against HIV.
"As as result, many of them may adopt risky ~exual behavio.ur, s~ch as not using
condoms, having multiple sexual partners, or ha, m&sex With hlgh-nsk partners. The
overall effect could increase the spread of HIV," (he Journal reports.
Also, circumcision by unqualified individuals under unsanitary conditions can lead+
to serious long-term complications or even deat[.
“Men who elect to undergo the surgical procedure
should have qualified medical personnel pertorm it
under hygienic conditions,” it reports.
“Our current position is that the evidence for a pro.
tective effect of male circumcision on 111V acquisition
in high-risk settings is reasonably convincing,” the
journal quotes Dr Timothy Farley of the World lealth
Oranisation’s Prvtramme of Research, Development
and Research Training in Human Reproduction in
Geneva.
But, Dr Fancy says. “there is no evidence that pro
moling circumcision among boys or men actually
reduces the incidence of HIV infection, and there is a
genuine possibility that it may undermine other 111V-
preventive strategieS.
And Dr Michel Carael, HIV prevention team leader
in Geneva with the Joint United Nations Programme
on IIIV/Aids, says: “While there is a need for the
international research community to be actively
invo1ved in further investigating the association
between circumcision and HIV prevention, it is too
early to make clear recommendations about this
matter.”
Men in some African countries seem to be seeking
circutucision to reduce 111V risks. Dr Ernest Ekong, a
public health physician at Military Base Hospital in
Yaba Lago. Nigeria, says there is an increased demand
for male circumcision in his country now as an ¡LIV-
prevention strategy.
In South Africa, many men are going to local clinics
or general practitioners to be circumcised for health
reasons, with their wives often making the appoint
ment for them,
Globally, about 20 per cent of men arc circumcised
for religious, cultural, medical or other reasons.
Throughout the developing world, only a small per
centage of male circumcisions are performed under
sterile conditions by qualified medical personnel.
Morbidity rates from circumcision arc high.
The journal says some observers also point out that
variation in circumcision practices may help explain
why HIV rates in countries or regions differ. In areas
where circumcision is common, HIV infection rates
tend to be low.
J n North America, where about 80 per cent of
men arc circumcised, only a fraction of one per
cern of the population is H 1V-positive.
In western Africa. another area where circum
cision is widely practised, rates of HIV infection
among those ages 15 to 49 are just one per cent to
five per cent. But in eastern and southern Africa,
where typically fewer than 20 per cent of men are
circumcised, rates of I-11V infection range from IS per
cent to 25 per cent.
‘ The spread of 111V in l’hailand and Cambodia also
has been largely attributed to low male circumcision
rates. ,
however, the report says, other scientists point out
that at least five studies have found no protective role
for circumcision and one has found that circumcision
increases risk of HIV infection.
There are discrepancies. Why, for example, are .
1-11V rates lower in Europe, where men typically are
uncircumcised? Why are they high in some places,
like Ethiopia, where men are usually circumcised?
The journal says some of these incongruities might
be explained by behaviour. Some circumcised men,
for example, may have hygienic, cultural or religious
practices that reduce their risk of HIV infection. This
included Muslim nien, whose religion forbids alcohol
use (associated with high-risk sex with commercial
sex workers and failure to use condoms).
Other Muslim practices that may help reduce HIV
transmission include polygamous marnages (that limit
sexual activity with women outside the family of mul
tiple wives) and posicoital genital washing before
praying.
Network reports that uncircumcised mçn may be
more likely to develop cancer of the penis because
they appear to be at risk of being infected with human
papilloma virus (II PV).
k says in a study of 38 Argentinian men with penile
cancer, most cancers were related to HPV.
In Bali, it has been estimated that over 75 per cent
of genital cancers contain HPV. As of 1986, cervical
cancer, which is often associated with HPV infection,
was the most frequent cancer in Balinese women.
Penile cancer was the second most frequent cancer
in Balinese men, who are rarely circumcised.
