Saturday Nation / December 22, 2001
EPIDEMIC

ANTI-AID WAR GAINING GROUND, SAYS ONGERI

Four HIV/Aids prevention policy documents
have been launched as the government
announced gains in the war against the
epidemic.
The launch comes as the latest statistics indicate
that the war against the killer scourge had
gained some "significant" ground in most parts
of the country.
The national HIV prevalence rates had now
either declined or stabilised to between 13 and
14 per cent from a high of between 30 and 40
per cent in some areas, Public Health Minister
Sam Ongeri announced on Thursday.
Prof Ongeri said the documents aimed at setting
the direction in which the country would
take in the implementation of HIV/Aids prevention.
The documents are Aids in Kenya (sixth edition),
National Guidelines for HlV/Aids Voluntary
Counselling and Testing, Clinical Guidelines
on Anti-Retroviral Therapy and National Condom
Policy and Strategy.
"Aids in Kenya, for example, provides up-todate
information on the scale of the epidemic
and serves to reinforce the government's
 commitment to the fight
against the killer dis
ease,” Prof Ongeri told
the launch at a Nairobi
hotel.
“It provides in-depth
analysis of the epidemi
ology and the social and
economic impacts of the
virus and highlights the
programmes and activi
ties currently taking
place all over the
country.”
Prof Ongeri said the government had stepped
up Hl V/Aids voluntary counselling and testing
services (VCT) to enable Kenyans to know their
HIV status and is encouraging people to go for
tests. “To this end, the government aims at
introducing at least five VCT site.s in every dis
trict to bring the service closer to those coun
selled to be tested,” he said.
Dr Nicholas Alipui, Unicef’s country repre
sentative, said his organisation believed that the
Aids war would only be won by various stake-
holders working together to develop and Imple
ment appropriate policies and guidelines.
