Saturday Nation/ November 24, 2001

COMPULSORY HIV TESTS PROPOSED FOR PRISONERS

By Mark Agutu
New prisoners should undergo mandatory
HIV - tests and those· infected isolated,
it has been proposed.
This would be the most effective way
of curbing the spread among inmates,
lobby groups, doctors and others told
the Legal Task Force on HIV/Aids at
Nakuru on Thursday evening.
At present, inmates are lumped
together and this "condemns uninfected
prisoners to HIV infection mainly
through homosexuality and other vices
rampant in prisons", the speakers said.
Civil servant Jacinta Were said: "A
law should be enacted to provide for
compulsory tests for prisoners. It should
also guarantee separation of infected
inmates to prevent transmission to others."
. But other speakers opposed idea, saying
it would be a violation of prisoners'
and other people's human rights.
Sports administrator Issa Gichangi
said pre-employment HIV-testing was
being carried out without prior counselling,
devastating those found with the
virus.
"They are left in a state of shock as
they are not well-prepared before being
tested," he said. "Consequently, their
health deteriorates due to fear and
shock."
Other speakers proposed laws spelling
out tougher measures, including death,
for those who knowingly spread HIV.
Ms Margaret Ouko, an anti-Aids
campaign programme officer in the district,
proposed that the law spelling out
penalties on those who consciously
spread sexually transmitted infections
should be modified to include HIV/Aids.
Trans Mara anti-Aids activist Simon
Makilel stunned the crowd when he recommended
that Aids sufferers be isolated
and kept at special centres.
Ankara Kenya Medical Association
chairman Dingo Idaho asked the insurance
industry not to discriminate against
Kenyans infected with the virus.
The Aids team, which held a day-long
session at the Panel Brotherhood Hall,
was led by one of its joint secretaries,
Mrs. Coauthoring Mummy, a state
counsel.