Sunday Nation /July 15, 2001

ONGERI WANTS KENYA'S DEBT WRITTEN OFF TO FIGHT AIDS

By MIKE MWANIKI
Donors should write off debts by
Kenya to enable the country to
effectively fight Aids, a Cabinet
minister has said.
Public Health Minister Sam Ongen
yesterday said the country spent $30
million (about Sh2.3 billion) annually
on servicing interest rates accruing from
foreign loans.
Speaking in Nairobi, Prof Ongeri also
appealed to the United Nations to
create effective poverty alleviation
programmes for Kenya and other Third
World countries to stem the rising tide
of new HlVAids cases.
Said the minister: “In Kenya for
example, 53 per cent of the population
live below the poverty line. Since
poverty has been identified as a major
contributor to the spread of Aids, the
UN should create programmes to
attract specific funding to help alleviate
the rasping poverty at the grassroots
level, where a majority live.”
Prof Ongen was receiving the visiting
UN envoy for Africa, Mr Stephen
Lewis, in the minister’s Afya House
office, Nairobi.
The function was attended, among
others, by (JNAids country
representative Warren Naamara,
Health Permanent Secretary Julius
Meme and Director of Medical Services
Richard Muga.
Mr Lewis, who is also a special envoy
of UN secretary-general Kofi Annan, is
on a fact-finding mission in Kenya and
other black African countries home
to 25.3 million people living with Aids—
to see how they are coping with the
killer. He said a global Aids fund
spearheaded by Mr Annan would start
to disburse cash by December.
Last month, Mr Annan said that
bctwecn $7 and $10 billion was needed
annually to halt Aids and reverse its
effects. Rich Western countries and
poor Aids-afflicted African nations
announced new contributions to the
global Aids fund that Mr Annan wants.
Mr Lewis said: “The global fund will
help in resource mobilisation to fight
IšJVlAids, especially in developing
countries, the hardest hit.”
Donations accepted
Dr Muga said the Government had
accepted a donation of HIV/Aids drugs
from a German-based pharmaceutical
company, Boehringer Ingelheim.
The firm’s free offer of Nevirapme
would help reduce mother-to-child
transmissions by about 50 per cent, he
added.
“Although the offer is welcome, we
need to address the plight of mothers
and fathers infected by the HIV virus,
“It is a moral and pertinent issue
since a child’s health is as important as
the mother’s or father’s,” he said.
Meanwhile, Prof Ongeri dismissed
press reports that the Kenya Aids
Vaccine Initiative (KAVI) project was
facing a “crisis” after a senior
researcher resigned recently.
l-le said: “The researcher resigned for
personal reasons. However, the
project’s protocols and methodology
are intact since they do not hinge on a
single person.”

MEDICS SOUND ALERTS ON QUACKS

By Sunday Nation Correspondent
Eighty per cent of Nakuru's pharmacists
are quacks, the Central Rift Pharmaceutical
Society claim.
The branch officials also urge drug
companies to ensure Aids drugs are
affordable and available in every part of
the country.
Speaking to the Press when he
launched a drugs awareness campaign
on Friday, the officials - Dr Heina
Maina (treasurer), Dr Paul Tanui (secretary)
and Dr Mburu Ndue - said that,
despite the society's efforts to purge the
profession of quacks, many were still in
business.
They urged the public to seek the services
of qualified pharmacists all the time.
The branch has introduced a mark, the
green cross, to help identify genuine
pharmacists.
They said that, despite the drop in the
Aids drugs prices, they could be bought
only in Nairobi.
Drug companies and the Government
should ensure they are available in other
parts of the country, they said.
The pharmacists, they said, would visit
institutions and other public places to
create awareness on drugs and their
proper use as well as distribute free
medicines.