Daily Nation/ Wednesday, September 12, 2001
RAPE AND TERROR RULE OVER THE LAND

BY JOE OMBUOR

The austere wind spirals the dust in tall,
grotesque cyclones, sending afternoon
strollers scurrying for safety behind
stained, wooden kiosks. As the storm
subsides, loud speakers cackle to life atop towering
minarets. Across the main road running through
town, a bell tolls from the nearby Catholic church.
It is worship time in Isiolo town, 300 kilometres
north of Nairobi. But the elaborate religious ambience
belies the harsh reality of the lives of an estimated
120,000 people in Kenya's war-torn frontier
town.
The town's lone street teems with begging children
by day and gun-totting rapists and murderers
by night.
Most of the children are orphans of Aids. Some
of them are the offspring of the bandits, whose
perennial violence has visited poverty and frustration
on pastoral family life and displaced thousands
of people.
The poverty and desolation have forced many
young girls and women out of their homes into the
streets, where they peddle their flesh for a living.
Going by the revelry in the numerous bars, night
clubs and lodges, prostitution is a casual business
here.
In the desert town women in the world's oldest
profession are indulgently
referred to as 'Coca Cola',
'Night Generation' and
'Mitumba'. Night Generation
are girls aged between 9
and 13; Coca Cola are those
in the 13-19 age bracket,
while mitumba refer to the
older, more sophisticated
lot.
The fact that most women are driven into the
trade by despair and poverty is clear from the case
of the typical, married woman. Let's call her Amina.
At midnight, she is in a bar, flirting with intent,
a seven-month-old pregnancy cleverly concealed
beneath her buibui.
"I have been doing this for a week now to raise
fare to return to my husband in Nyeri, but have
managed to save only Sh300," she opens up after a
little cajoling.
Amina, who claims to be 18, says she returned
home to her parents after a misunderstanding with
her husband of one year. "But they threw me out
without any money. I have no option but to return
to my husband with my problems unsolved," she
says. "In the meantime, I have to survive." If the
story of Amina's twilight life is shocking, listening
to the woes of rape victims is horrifying. An alarming
wave of rape has devastated many families in
the area, leaving in its wake individuals deprived
of any claim to dignity or self-worth. Many parents
have had to relocate their grown-up children for
fear of being humiliated by the beastly rapists.
"They stage robbery raids and at gun point,
force boys into sex with their mothers, and fathers
with their daughters. Then they rape and sodomise
their victims," says Halima Zuberi, a widowed
mother of four.
Halima sent her elder children, one aged 26 and
the other 22, to live with relatives in Meru and
Mombasa. She has rented cheap accommodation
in the neighbourhood for the younger ones.
Zainab Abdullahi has two children aged nine
and 21. The older one lives in a rented house.
"Nothing is more dehumanising than being
forced into sex with your children or getting raped
as they watch, as often happens here. In some families,
fathers have deserted their homes in shame,
leaving their families to founder in poverty."
The rapists are not scared of contracting HIV
and, either out of ignorance or sheer malice, use
crude polythene paper bags instead of condoms.
Agnes AliIa, 40, lost her husband to Aids and
was sickly when she was attacked. She narrates
how she pleaded with a frenzied gang not to touch
her. It was all in vain. "I told them I was HIV
positive, but they would not listen. They proceeded
to rape me in turns. As if that was not enough, they
sodomised my 12-year-old son. He is now HIV
positive," she moans.
For Irene Muthoni, who has been down with
Aids for three years, the pain of being raped
together with two of her daughters turned into permanent
agony when both girls succumbed to the
disease.
"I lost the will to live when they died. At one
point, I was determined to take my own life. I had
already bought rat poison for the purpose but was
stopped in the nick of time," she says.
Muthoni now lives with her two sons in perpetual
dread of rapists in Isiolo's suburb of Kula
Mawe.
"I fear for the boys, who narrowly escaped sodomy
during the attack. I have committed them to
God," she says.
Sheikh Abdi Nassir of Isiolo's Jamia Mosque
and the institution's administrator, Ahmed Abdi
Set, blame the increased incidents of banditry on
the ready availability of guns.
A growing disrespect for religious values, says
Sheikh Nassir, is responsible for promiscuity and
violence. "Islam is against promiscuity and prostitution.
Those engaging in the practice cannot be
Muslims."
"We cannot blame those who get raped or sodomised,
but we condemn the culprits and wonder
why the Government's security arm has not caught
up with them," says Sheikh Nassir.


HOW AIDS IS CHANGING THE STRUCTURE OF FAMILIES

JOE OMBUOR
Achuka Ewoi is well into her 80s.
One would expect that, with her five
surviving children all grown up with
families of their own, she would now
be leaning back, enjoying her twilight years and
being cared for. But today, Achuka is a mother
all over again, raising five children aged between
seven and 14 years.
One of these is her grandchild, Lekalio. His
parents died from Aids-related illnesses, as did
Achura's two other offspring.
She married early, and had eight children -
six boys and two girls. Frail and her face wrinkled,
Achuka is today a widow with only five
living children.
"I know what a parent means to a child," she
says, speaking pensively about her return to
motherhood. "I had to step in to fill that gap for
Lekalio. His brothers and sisters were adopted
by my other children."
She was asked by Pepo la Tumaini Jangwani,
an Isiolo-based HIV/Aids community programme,
to play the role of mother to other
orphans.
At her shack in Kula Mawe, on the outskirts of
Isiolo town, 14-year-old Lekalio and Emmanuel,
11, have just returned home. They spent the day
begging in town and gleaning discarded foodstuffs
at the market, an exercise referred to as
kusanya, which means 'to collect'.
The other children are in school. Kusanya is
done in turns, and tomorrow Lekalio and
Emmanuel will go to school, while two others go
to town.
"I cook for the children. I am there for them
when they are sad and when they are happy. I
offer them comfort, re-assurance and advice. I
nurse them when they fall sick, just as any caring
mother would do," says Achuka.
The children and other youths in the community
fondly refer to her as Ito (Turkana for
mother), and she lives up to her name - $eeing
to it that no child is unfairly heated in the home.
All five children use Ewoi as their surname.
"The common name helps them regard each
other as brothers and sisters and saves them the
trauma of thinking about their dead patents,"
says Achuka.
Her age gives her an advantage in disGussing
sexuality, and especially the danger of HIY/Aids.
"As a grandmother, I engage my children in open
discussion on all matters affecting their lives
without the inhibition of shame."
And it is not just here that Aids has wrought
pain and anguish. Not far from Kula Mawe, in
another shack in Isiolo, lO-year-old Zablon
Muatha struggles to look after his ailing mother,
Joyce Nkuruguchu. He does all the household
chores. The rest of the time is divided between
going to school and kusanya.
Joyce came to Isiolo from the neighbouring
Meru District nearly a decade ago to look for
work. She soon found herself sucked into
prostitution.
"I was still healthy and attractive, despite the
fact that I had been married to a cruel and reckless
husband who drank all his money and beat
me for eight years. He also sold off all our
property."
In Isiolo, life was good. She had four ¢hildren
from her failed marriage, while Muatha Wasborn
in Isiolo. "I had money and I quickly forgot the
misery of my married life."
About three years ago, however, she started to
get frequent bouts of illness. "I've had diarrhoea,
typhoid, tuberculosis, skin complications - name
it. I suffered paralysis and could hardly move my
hands and legs until Pepo la Tumaini Jangwani
organised drugs for me," she says.