Daily Nation! Wedn~sday, July 25;"2001                                                                                                                                                                            11
                                                                                                     ~~~.1111.""   .',1"i   ~   IL
                                                                                                                                 •.•• I.~I.~r. TIII"i.~ rill   ":II
   Hope 01 care as 16
   abandoned babies
   move to new centre
  Christopher's face beams with joy. He is two
  years old and was brought to the Dagoretti
  Children's Centre together with his brother
  Justine Mbogo in January this year after his
  mother died. Their father is unable to care
  for them and their grandmother is unable to
  care for them because she has no income.
    They are just two of first 16 babies
  affected or infected with HIV. On Monday,
  the children found a new home at the Feed
  the Children's Frances Jones Abandoned
  Baby Centre in Dagoretti on the outskirts of
  Nairobi. Miss Yolanda lVIasinde, the reigning
  Miss World· Kenya, helped to move the
  children.
     Yolanda has dedicated herself to the plight
  of babies affected by HIV.
     Feed The Children built the KSh27million
  Frances Jones Abandoned Baby Centre to
  provide 24-hour care, love and support for
  40 abandoned babies. The new centre will
  officially open on August 1, and President
  Moi has been asked to officiate.
    ll'fhrough the ABC, Feed The Children
  hopes to give these babies love, support and
  hope," said Ian Harris, theorganisation's
  international director.
     Many babies are abandoned by their moth·
  ers becau.se of lack of understanding about
  HIV/Aids and pregnancy.
    llSome of these babies were abandoned
  because their parents simply could not care
  for them" said Bertha Ojany, ABC Nursing
  coordinator. llBut they are now smiling, happy
  and healthy."
     The ABC will receive babies from Kenyatta,                                                                                                                                             Photo/Daniel Otieno
  Getrudes and other hospitals. There are cur·
  rently 547,000 children in Kenya alone who                       Yolanda Masinde, the reigning Miss World·Kenya, charms laughter out of two·year·old Christopher Nyaga at the Aban·
  have lost one or both parents to HIV/Aids.                       doned Baby Centre in Nairobi. Christopher is among the first 16 abandoned babies moved into the home on Monday.
                                          -DANIEL         OTIENO
        You can now make tracks to eight destinations across Africa with British Airways. For more details, simply call 311623.
        Services operated by Regional Air.
                                                                                                                                                                      BRITISH AIRWAYS ~
                                                                                                                                                                      The world's favourite airline
        Flights to Hargeisa start from 1st August 2001.
Page 


-------------------Trial Version-----------------------

Convert PDF to Text Desktop Software.

Copyright Convertpdftotext.net 2014.

To remove these lines, please activate your software from http://www.convertpdftotext.net/buynow.htm

-------------------------------------------------------
