26                                                                              ~----7--0=@:                                                             Daily Nation! Thursday December 13,2001
Fighting Aids the teens' way
By Peter Musa
A section of the youth thinks the current campaign to fight the Aids scourge is not talking
to them. "Seminars in big hotels discussing policy issues is not what captures our atten-
tion," says Evans Gor, chairman, All Kenya Enterprising Youths (AKEY).
   Mr Gor says the message, no matter how good, is boring the youth and most likely will
miss the mark. "The youth need to hear this in their own langnage and pace hence we put
some play into our campaigns."
   Akey with 600 volunteers from most of the city slums has just concluded a football
tournament which has been going hand in hand with dramatised messages on responsible
sexual behaviour.
   "They arc more likely to understand the, "Tuliza boli" language easier than the dry
and scary statistics from Aids experts.
   The group is also involved in a clean up programme in Kariobangi and Maringo areas of
Nairobi. In Kariobangi, says Mr Gor, "the sewage system had been ripped open to allow
faster now but ended up creating a health hazard. Akey has been educating the residents
on the need to maintain a clean environment and encouraging them to participate in
clean-up exercises.                                                                                                                                                                                  Picha/File
   "The people are now realising the benefits after we carried out the first phase of clean   Minister of State in the office of the President, Mr William ole Ntimama presents a trophy to Ms
up with them." Akey also assist the Cascia Women Group in Madoya slum, Kariobangi,            Susan Wangechi of Akey for the winning girls' football team in a HIV\Aids behaviour change soccer
Nairobi which mainly caters for Aids orphans.
   "We found that the women needed guidance in management, they lacked information            tournament during the World Aids Day celebrated recently. An official from the National Aids Control
about organisations that offered assistance to their type of groups," says Mr Gor             Council (left) looks on.
                                                                                                                                        Malaria vaccine
                                                                                                                                        completes first
                                                                                                                                        trials in Africa
                                                                                                                                         By Paul Redfern, Nation
                                                                                                                                         Correspondent, London
                                                                                                                                                   he first successful trials of a British designed vaccine for
                                                                                                                                                    cent protection against the most virulent form of malaria but
                                                                                                                                         T          malaria have been completed in The Gambia.
                                                                                                                                                      Initial results showed that the vaccine offered up to 47 per
                                                                                                                                         scientists are convinced that further research will enable it to put up
                                                                                                                                         an even stronger defence against the parasite.
                                                                                                                                            At present there is no international vaccine against malaria. Scien-
                                                                                                                                         tists have been struggling for years to create one although some crit-
                                                                                                                                         ics say that not enough funds have been made available for research.
                                                                                                                                            The vaccine works by using a portion of the malaria parasite to
                                                                                                                                         stimulate the body's immune system into producing antibodies and
                                                                                                                                         T-cells that fight the micro-organism. This prevents the parasite from
                                                                                                                                         entering red blood cells and starting the disease.
                                                                                                                                            Now the trials in The Gambia have shown the vaccine is safe in
                                                                                                                                         adults and research is under way into whether it can be used safely
                                                                                                                                         for children. More children
                                                                                                                                         under five die from malaria
                                                                                                                                         than any other disease in the
                                                                                                                                         world. The numbers are cata-
                                                                                                                                         strophic.
                                                                                                                                            There are between 300 and
                                                                                                                                         500 million cases of malaria
                                                                                                                                         each year. Two thirds of those
                                                                                                                                         who die from the parasite are
                                                                                                                                         children and 90 per cent of
                                                                                                                                         these children live in Africa.
                                                                                                                                             Details of the research were
                                                                                                                                         published in the medical journal, The Lancet last week. It is esti-
                                                                                                                                         mated the vaccine could become generally available within a decade.
                                                                                                                                             Meanwhile a new report has praised anti-malarial treatment given
                                                                                                                                         to Kenyan women. A recent study in Kilifi has shown that giving
                                                                                                                                         women the anti-malarial sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP) a couple of
                                                                                                                                         times during pregnancy when attending antenatal care, can reduce
                                                                                                                                         severe anaemia by around 40 percent.
                                                                                                                                             In the past, pregnant women were offered weekly chloroq,uine but
                                                                                                                                         widespread resistance has rendered this useless in many Afncan
                                                                                                                                         countries. Now a new treatment regime in Kenya targets all pregnant
                                                                                                                                         women because those infected frequently lack symptoms and infec-
                                                                                                                                         tion is difficult to detect with blood tests.
                                                                                                                                             The London-based research agency, Panos, says the results in
                                                                                                                                         terms of a reduction in severe anaemia are quite dramatic. It says the
                                                                                                                                         issue is important in helping to try and cut the numbers of women
                                                                                                                                         dying from pregnancy complications.
                                                                                                                                             "The tragedy is that almost every one of these deaths is avoida-
                                                                                                                                         ble," Panos says. "Failures to address the needs of pregnant women •••
                                                                                                                                          are a social injustice of huge proportions."
                                                                                                                                             East Africa has amongst the highest rates of maternal death in the
                                                                                                                                         world, the report says.'                                                  i
                                                                                                                                         Osho Chemicalto train farmer~
                                                                                                                                         A local chemical distribution company, Osho Chemical Industries
                                                                                                                                         Limited, is holding field days for horticultural farmers at Baraka Col-
                                                                                                                                         lege, Molo, today and at Karii market, Mwea Division tomorrow.
                                                                                                                                            The training which is organised in conjunction with Maquinas Agri-
                                                                                                                                         colas Iacto of South Africa will focus on effective spraying.
                                                                                                                                            "For effective spraying to be achieved so many parameters must be
                                                                                                                                         right and among them the droplet size is very important for the
                                                                                                                                         sprayed chemical to attach itself to the target," explains Mr Richard
                                                                                                                                         Githinji, product development manager, Osho Chemical.
                                                                                                                                            More often than not, he said, a lot of chemical waste is occasioned
                                                                                                                                         by poor spraying practice. "Over dilution for example will not have
                                                                                                                                         the required potency to kill targeted pests while underdilution will
                                                                                                                                         scorch the plant."
                                                                                                                                            On display will be their latest addition to their knap sack sprayers'
                                                                                                                                         technology - a constant pressure control valve.
Page 


-------------------Trial Version-----------------------

Convert PDF to Text Desktop Software.

Copyright Convertpdftotext.net 2014.

To remove these lines, please activate your software from http://www.convertpdftotext.net/buynow.htm

-------------------------------------------------------
