{"text": "AUGUST 2, 1998\n\nIn the past week, the Preselect opened the\u2028\nAthi River Export Processing Zone project. The purpose of the US$20 million dollar World Bank financed project is to entice foreign investors to come and generate employment and export earnings.\u2028In the same week, the Government signed an aid agreement with the British Government for a \u00a320 million informal sector development project. Needless to say, the sterling role played by the informal queue in creating employment and alleviating poverty was more than adequately recognized by both sides. Elsewhere, the City Council of Nairobi destroyed 330 informal sector enterprises supporting at least ten times as many livelihoods when the operators, their dependents\u2019 and their suppliers are all taken into account. And those are just the nuns that made the news. Am one of those people who finds browsing through the day\u2019s papers and catching upon the latest rumours over a shoe shine fantastic value for Sh 25? I turned up at one of my favorite shoe shine stands last week only to find a City Council askari bashing np the man\u2019s shoe bon with the ferocity of a the possessed. Why seemingly sane people would sanction the actions of the City Council, go unto defend them us the Deputy Mayor and the Town Clerk did last week and still be able to live with their conscience only God knows. How I miss Mayor King\u2019nn but it is the incompetence and outright stupidity that dive at to despair. Let\u2019s start with the City. Broke as ill is, it prefers to spend its resources harassing traders a instead of taxing them, his estimated that there are over 20,000 unlike used traders in Nairobi.\u2028\n Let us say for argument\u2019s sake that for every one who dares, there are 5 who are deterred by the harassment. We urge looking at 100,000 potential traders. If the City were to license them at Sh ISO a month, we\u2028are talking over ShlOO million a year in licence lees alone. But suppose the City was also to provide these people with trading sites and markets. At a rental rate of say lo shillings per trader a day, this translates to over Sh300 million forestall income u year.\u2028\nLet\u2019s proceed to the government and donor agencies. Il \u00a1s now 26 years since they \u2018discovered\u2019 the infonnal sector (in the famous ILO employment report of 1972). Then, and at every one of God only knows how many subsequent studies, infrastructure and insecure property rights were identified as the main problem faces informal sector entrepreneurs. Of over 50 million dollars spent by the major donor agencies in the informal sector (World Bank, USAID, EU. Britain,\n UNDP) over the last five years, hardly any money has gone into infrastructure, which is the surest way of securing the property rights of informal sector entrepreneurs.\u2028\n Most of the money goes to yet mare studies, seminars, training; and evaluation, to know of at least five major studies going anal present. Simply put, informal sector programmes are little more than a gravy train for bureaucrats arid an indefatigable army of consultants.\u2028\nRemeniher Pearl Omega? And Kemmon before that? With all she information esas. pains row in place, one would have hoped that we\u2019d heard the loss of snake oil salesmen cashing \u00a1non Aids, While Kemron and Pearl Omega were, at worst, harmless concoctions promoted by hither \u2018to respectable Kenyan scientists, Basil Wainright alias Dr Stone and his ozone blood treatment therapy ore scary stuff Wainrighi is u serial feaadsler of the run. He has no known medical training or tkitts. His therapy supposedly stonulains Practitioners immune system response not just to HIV but also to cancer, diabetes, joint diseases. \n\nHigh blood pressure, kidney disease, malaria and sleeping sickness. He does not list impotence and lack of money but suppose those are minor ailments for immune system that has pined as to regulate insulin and blood pressure. Actually, the science behind the ozone therapy sounds auto much less convincing than the chameleon drug invented a few years ago by S.K. Maingi, a point next local lseibol\u00ecst. You see, in a sea of\u2028red, white blood cells stick out like a sore thumb. \u2028\nThe chameleon drug, so Maingi said, enables the white blood cells lo canton Ooze themselves which makes ii impassible for the HlV virus to find them. As wonder drugs go, the concept is not annulrageons as it may sound at fin; a little touch up with genetic mumbo jumbo, good sales pitch, the right contact in the right places and Maingi would have had kimsellu nice little earner. There is a very fundamental question here, namely how health care practitioners should he regulated. The response of the medical profession, the Press and that of virtually all the people whose opinion I have sought on the Wainright scandal lawn just how badly misunderstood the purpose of regulation is. All agree that Wainrighl should not have been allowed\u2028to administer his therapy because its embrace is unproven and he is not u medical doctor. This reasoning is simply wrong.\u2028\nThough licensed by the government, practitioners of traditional medicine like Muingi are not doctors, and they are not required to subject their herbal preparations lo rigorous unscientific validation procedures Asia \u2018Western\u2019 medicine.\u2028\nFor instance, Prof Obet could have easily taken his Pearl Omega from the jurisdiction of his professional peers have defect. Tag to traditional medicine, in which case ii would have bees perfectly legal for him to market its everything from love portion lathe fountain of youth.\u2028\nIroning out these contradictions is actually easier thou lies often made nude lo brute it requires the regulator to late an economic as opposed to a scientific perspective.\u2028\nFrom an economic perspective, health care provision is a \u2018market\u2019 like any other. That is, one in which all meets (Western medicine, African traditional, Chinese. homoeopathists, faith healers, etc) offer their wares to the consumer. To be sure, health care differs from most other things that we buy in that the value of what we buy is not easily established at the time is consumed, and it could welt cause harm before we do.\u2028\nHowever, this difference should not be exaggerated, linked there are a good many people who are not deterred from indulging in alcohol, cigarettes and unprotected sees by the knowledge of the potential harm to one\u2019s health.\u2028\nThe regulator\u2019s job is nut to dictate what is sold on the market or to protect consumers from their own idiosyncrasies hut to ensure of level playing field for all players and to minimize harm. Applied to healthcare, ensuring a level playing field means that practitioners and therapies should be a7proved on the basis of socially accepted risk, not on the basis of social life proof sf effectiveness. To minimize brain, the health regulator\u2019s responsibility is to ensure that consumers are adequately infamies of the known risks associated with therapies of freed, for example, to assure limai Weslem doctors donor purport to be herbalists and vice versa. Leaving Wainwrights\u2019 little misunderstanding with Interpol aside for the moment, all that should he required of the regulator is to come up with an appropriate licence category \u2018experiment \u2018ensure that it is prominently displayed in his business premises and leave consumers to their own follies. As we say, mtoto akiiilia wembe, mpe. \u2028\n Absurd informal\u2028\n sector policies"}