DAILY NATION
WEDNESDAY MAY 6, 2009

LIVING POSITIVELY
Where things once seemed
impossible, now the future is
looking brighter than ever
This is the diary of Asunta Wagura, a mother of two who
tested positive 20 years ago. She is the executive director of
the Kenya Network of Women with Aids (KENWA).
Towards the end of last year, I was able to experience
and enjoy yet another achievement of my life. I escorted
Nyambura, my foster daughter, to the airport – she was
going abroad to study. I felt like the happiest woman in the
world even though achievements such as this one never make
the headlines. I was happy because I knew I had struck just the
right chord in Nyambura’s heart.
She and I go way back and the history we share is a
bittersweet one. She is the second last of six children and when
I took her in, her biological mother had just died from HIVrelated
complications. Actually, she died while they were asleep
together.
Nyambura touched me because of her commitment to
looking after her mother. She cleaned her mother’s soiled linen
and even bathed her. She was the caregiver even though she
was still a minor and had no prior training in the basics of care
and support of a person living with HIV. So when her mother
died, I took her as most of her other siblings went to the streets.
Sadly, we learnt later that some of them died of one cause or
another.
I have since learnt that being a foster mother isn’t
necessarily about having the wherewithal; it’s about offering
a disadvantaged child security and comfort. It’s about
looking past some of the superficial boundaries we erect and
recognising that children, regardless of where they come from,
are a source of pride and joy.
Money for food
When I took Nyambura in, I was broke, and had been that way
for quite some time. At one point I even thought I was biting off
more than I could chew. I rarely had enough money for food and
rent. Sometimes I had to play cat and mouse games with my
landlord over accumulating rent arrears. I was living in an 11-
by-11-foot single room in Kayole Estate, in Nairobi’s Eastlands
area. I remember referring to it as a ‘self-confused’ apartment
because the room was everything rolled into one – our living
room, kitchen and dining room. At night, we moved some of our
household goods outside to create bedroom space.
When she finished secondary school, Nyambura attended
a college in the city centre. However, that was not where her
heart was. She dreamed of going abroad and then returning to
help build her country with the knowledge she had acquired.
This looked like an impossible dream because I didn’t have the
means. But I am grateful that she was finally able to go to do it.
There was a time when even going to Form One was the
biggest challenge of my life. But nothing is impossible and I am
grateful to the well-wishers who helped me get a scholarship
for Nyambura. It just goes to show that even in my selfconfused
state, God had already created the way and all I had to
do was chin up and take this child under my wings.
Small token
A few weeks ago my foster daughter sent me a little money,
which I received with a lot of gratitude to God. The small token
taught me that I shouldn’t stop having big dreams for my life,
even when they seem to be out of reach. Many people give
up when it seems like the stars aren’t in alignment with their
desires or if their dreams require hundreds of thousands of
shillings that they don’t have.
All I can do this week, as we commemorate a day dedicated to
mothers all over the world, is wish Nyambura all the best in life.
I would like her to know I am overjoyed that I can now join the
proud league of mothers who have sent their children abroad to
study. I may not have helped many, but at least for Nyambura I
have made the difference between hope and helplessness.
It seems like just yesterday when we were slaving through
the rigours of life and wondering if we would get through one
more day safely. This is truly one of the joys of motherhood
– seeing your child succeed in life and become something.
Foster motherhood has accorded me the chance to share my
parenting gifts and talents with others. As someone once said,
service to others is the rent we pay for our tenancy on God’s
earth.
To all the foster mums out there who have opened their
hearts and homes to disadvantaged children, have a blessed
Mothers’ Day.
asuntawagura@hotmail.com
Pride and joy of
a foster mother