Daily Nation/ Thursday April 28, 2005

Curtain falls
on ‘Majengo’
Aids vaccine

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 27
far as a win for Kenya. “Although the vaccine did
not achieve our expectations, we are happy to
have established a high quality infrastructure and
knowledge base for future excursions,” says Dr
Omu Anzala, Kenya initiative project manager.
A number of researchers, including Dr Anzala,
are exploring the possibility of redesigning the
vaccine to see if it can work better than the way it
has done. Dr Anzala has also thanked Kenyan
volunteers in the project and appealed for more
to come forward as they embark on testing other
vaccines.
Abandoning vaccine
Talking to Horizon, Dr Kambili said they are
abandoning this vaccine and now working with
scientists to start testing another candidate hopefully
before the end of the year.
Discussion between the initiative and Vaccine
Research Centre of the National Institute of
Health of America, who have developed the vaccine,
are said to be at an advanced stage.
At the moment, work is in process to prepare
several centres at Kagemi, Kenya Medical
Research Institute’s Kilifi station, and Kenyatta
National Hospital in preparation of other
vaccines.
Studies at the three sites are looking at the
various blood parameters in preparation of these
new vaccines.
Prostitutes in Gambia
The decision to end further trials bring to and
end several of years of research and more than
four years of the trying the vaccines safety and
ability to elicit immune responses.
The idea behind the development of this vaccine
started more than 10 years ago and was
based on what Kenyan and scientists from Manitoba
University from Canada, observed among
women prostitutes living in Majengo slums.
These women were not being infected even
after having unprotected sex, sometimes, with
infected men. It was later discovered they had
specific Killer T-Cells, which destroyed the HIV
virus, making them remain negative.
Researchers from Oxford University saw similar
results among prostitutes in Gambia. With this
knowledge, scientists from Oxford and University
of Nairobi, decided to partner to develop the current
vaccine that would prevent people from
being infected with the HIV virus.
—An AWC-Feature