Daily Nation/ Thursday, April 7, 2005

MOST COMMON CAUSES OF DEATH

The survival and well-being of mothers
and children is central to solving
economic, social and developmental
challenges. When mothers and children
die or are sick, their families, communities and
nations suffer as well. Improving the survival and
well being of mothers and children will not only
increase the health of societies, but also
decrease inequity and poverty.
Approximately 3,000 to 6,000 Kenyans die
yearly from pregnancy related complications.
This translates into about ten large passenger
aircraft crashing annually. In Kenya, the lifetime
risk of dying due to a pregnancy related condition
is 1 for every 20 pregnancies. This does not
compare favourably with developed countries
where the risk of dying in childbirth has been
tremendously reduced over the years.
Child-bearing related deaths are the commonest
cause of death among women aged 15-49 years,
contributing to 27 per cent of the deaths in this
age-group. Additionally, for every maternal death
30,000 women suffer chronic illnesses and
disability associated with pregnancy and
childbirth which include obstetric fistula,
paralysis, and infertility among others.
These figures are unjustifiably high since
maternal death is preventable even in resource
poor countries. The main causes of deaths
include: severe bleeding obstructed labour,
eclampsia, unsafe abortion and infections.
Problems of malaria, anaemia and STI/HIV/Aids
also contribute to the high maternal morbidity and
mortality in Kenya. Mothers die because of
delivery with unskilled persons, delay in seeking,
accessing and receiving care. All the above
factors are contributed by poverty, socio-cultural,
economic and gender issues, due to lack of
women empowerment.
In response to this scenario, Kenya is
signatory to the attainment of the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) especially goal
number 5, which is specific to maternal and
newborn health.
Likewise, the Ministry of Health has put in
place policies, standards and guidelines and
strategies targeting the improvement of maternal
and newborn health. Some of these documents
include: Safe Motherhood and Newborn Health
Program Guidelines, National Reproductive
Health Strategy, National Standards on Maternal
Health and Clinical Audit Guidelines, National
Reproductive Health Policy document,
Guidelines for facility based Maternal and
Perinatal death audit, Capacity building for
service providers to provide essential obstetric
care, including their recruitment, strengthening
health facilities countrywide to provide quality
Basic Essential Obstetric Care and
Comprehensive Essential Obstetric Care.
PMTCT interventions have been factored in
maternal and newborn health programs since on
average nine per cent of pregnant women are
HIV positive. Maternal Death Reviews are in
place in our health facilities (both public and
private) in order to understand clearly why
mothers are dying during pregnancy and
childbirth, and institute remedial measures. The
Ministry of Health is also in the process of
making Maternal Death a notifiable condition.
Community mobilisation strategies have been
initiated to mobilize communities to seek safe
motherhood and neonatal services.
What can communities do to improve maternal
and newborn outcome? They should:
Understand that pregnancy is a risky condition
and the need to be prepared for any
complications by making a birth- plan, contribute
towards transport for emergency referrals, and
support the facilities within their localities.
Globally, 29,000 children are dying daily of
preventable causes. In Kenya, the under-five
mortality rate has increased from 110 – 115
deaths/ per 1000 live births from between 1998
and 2003. The major causes of illnesses and 70
per cent of the deaths are malaria, acute
respiratory tract infections, pneumonia,
diarrhoea, measles, malnutrition, skin infections
and intestinal worms. prenatal and maternal
causes and HIV/aids related diseases also
contribute significantly.
In response to the deteriorating child health
indicators, the Ministry of Health has adopted the
integrated management of childhood illnesses
strategy that aims at providing the first level
health worker with skills and enabling
environment to recognize and treat minor
conditions, and promptly refer severe cases for
further management after providing emergency
care. In addition an adaptation has been made to
include recognition and management of
symptomatic HIV infection and vitamin A
supplementation for all the children below 5
years of age. Every child is examined for
malnutrition and the caretaker counselled
accordingly. In addition the child’s immunization
status is determined and vaccines given at the
facility thus reducing chances of missed
opportunity for immunisation.
As we commemorate this year’s World Health
Day, I take this opportunity to thank Kenyans and
our partners for their efforts towards saving
mother’s and children’s’ lives and urge them to
press on towards the achievement of the MDGs.
Lastly, the Ministry of Health is committed to
continue working with key Government Ministries
and Partners to ensure that we join forces and
act to ensure that every ‘mother and child’
counts. In order to make a difference, we must all
join forces and act. Together we can do it. Each
one of us has a role.
— Charity Ngilu,
Minister for Health
By RACHEL N. MUSOKE
.
“The future will be healthier and more productive for all
societies if we act now to make every mother and child
count”
*** The millennium development goals for the period 1990 to
2015 focus on a number of interrelated issues that
specifically cover whole populations. As of now,
remember that almost 15 years are gone and 10 years
are left. What have we achieved on all or the goals that
specifically affect mothers and children – namely goal 1 on
poverty and hunger; goal 4 on child mortality; goal 5 on maternal
health? The answer is very little or none.
When we talk of survival, it is important to think intact survival,
that is no or at the most minimal disability. For every mother or
child who die, there are several who are left with life-long
disability. Many disabled people cannot perform as well as others
in nation-building. The causes of death and disability in mothers
and children are to a large extent preventable or treatable.
In Kenya, child deaths have been increasing over the years.
Current figures show that for every 1,000 children born alive,
about 115 do not reach their fifth birthday. Probably, an equal
number are born dead. Parents will want to replace the dead ones
as soon as possible thus compromising mother’s health. This
inevitably leads to high mortality among the mothers.
Just imagine: nearly 40 per cent of child deaths occur in the
first month of life; two thirds of these dying in the first week and
the majority in the first 24 hours of birth. These deaths are just
numbers to most of us. The baby is yet to acquire a name. Most
of these deaths are due to baby being born too small (low birth
weight) failure to breathe/ cry at birth (birth asphyxia) and severe
infections. Continue to imagine that globally, for every two people
who die in a traffic accident, one mother and 20 children die of
preventable and treatable conditions. The deaths due to accidents
make it to the newspapers but deaths of mothers and children
hardly ever. In every country including Kenya the poorest families
suffer the greatest burden.
The main underlying factor in all these deaths is malnutrition
(under nutrition). The estimates are that up to 60 per cent of the
deaths in children the underlying cause in malnutrition. But
unfortunately in medical records or even on death certificates, this
cause is not often reported. What will be recorded is malaria,
pneumonia etc. Malnutrition is a silent killer.
The cycle of malnutrition through one’s life cycle perpetuates
poverty. Malnourished individuals cannot perform as well as the
well nourished ones. Hence their earning capacity is
compromised. As a result, child
care and nutrition is inadequate.
Children who are malnourished
perform poorly in school and are
more likely to drop out of school.
They carry on the cycle into the
next generation.
Lets look at malnutrition an a
little more detail. Mothers who are
poorly nourished throughout their
life are likely to become stunted
adults. They are likely to have low
birth weight babies but if the baby
is big they get difficult and
obstructed labour. The malaria
and other infections tend to be
more severe. Survival for both is
in jeopardy.
From the afore mentioned, we
can see that mothers’ health is a nation’s wealth. Women carry the
burden of looking after everybody in the family, food production may
be in their hands as well as other economic activities. A nation that
does not look after their women is going to be a poor nation. Healthy
mothers means less spending on health budget for the family as
well as nationally. When we read that people are selling property in
order to pay for health, we see a sick nation that may never alleviate
poverty.
So what can we improve the situation? “Make every mother and
child count” Get involved irrespective of our work and trade.
Start with your home/ family. Although this message is on
mothers and children, men/ fathers are part of the pack. Behind a
successful family there should be a man. Men need to play their
roles as head of the family. Although most single parent households
are headed by women who really struggle to keep the family, there
is a father to these children. Men, do not just come to claim body
and property after death be there to prevent the death. If men and
women made choices together, it is highly likely that the whole
family will remain healthy. Decide on the number of children you can
comfortably support, use appropriate and sure methods of planning
your family. Optimal care for the young child in the home includes
exclusive breast feeding for six months, appropriate and nutritious
complementary food thereafter in addition to breast milk. The rest of
the family is not forgotten in terms of food and hygiene. When one is
living on meager resources then one needs to be very innovative in
terms of feeding the family.
If you are in a community and all of us are, do not wait for people
from outside to organise you, to tell you what to do. You know the
community better than anybody else. Identify your
problems and try to find solutions. Do not wait for
the government to do things for you – you can do
without them.
If you are a leader of any sort, work with groups
in your community. Not as a boss but as a partner.
Assist them to understand and recognise their
strengths. Enable them to take control and improve
the health of the community. Do not encourage a
hand me down attitude. Let people work for their
dues. The money we get from donors was earned
by someone and it comes with strings.
For the health professional, there is a lot that
can be done even with the limited budgets. There
is a wealth of information that is not passed on to
clients. There is this word called empowerment of
the people to take care of themselves. Can client
education be part and parcel of care. Client - health
worker contact is high but education/discussion is
low.
The claim is that there is no time. It is upon the
workers to create time for this activity. Preventive
activity takes less time but the yield is high.
Mortality and morbidity has to be reduced through
nobody else but the health professionals. If each
health worker spent five to 10 minutes per work
shift a lot of messages will reach the clients. Surely
this is not too much to ask. Give it a try. But before
you give the message, ensure that the information you have is up
to date.
A number of clients are confused by conflicting information
from health workers. Encourage health seeking behaviour of all
you come into contact. Tell them that it is cheaper to report early
is the course of the disease than coming late. Encourage people
to ask questions. Show them the value of preventing illness. Talk
about the common causes of illness and death and how they can
be prevented through good nutrition, hygiene and immunisation.
In the long run it will be cheaper for them and the quality of life will
be better. Be confident at the same time kind and respectful of all
you treat and care for.
The health care facility: Equipping and care of the equipment is
one thing that plagues health care facility. Sometimes it is the
personnel that handle equipment badly sometimes it is the
maintenance that is lacking. Is the facility always ready for
emergencies? Are the personnel trained to deal with
emergencies? Have guidelines in place so that all workers are
clear on what to do in specific situations.
There are effective interventions to reduce mother and child
mortality. These include skilled care during pregnancy and child
birth; appropriate feeding of mother, infant and child; prevention of
illness through hygiene, immunisation of mother and baby, use of
insecticides and bed nets and many more; early and adequate
treatment of diseases. If we act now and through the days,
months and years we will reduce the carnage. Let’s not stop
action on world health day.
Women’s Well-Being:
A Nation’s Wealth