Daily Nation/ Thursday November 3, 2005

Aids projects face cash crunch
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 29

Finance to enable it complete its work. “For this
reason, the disbursement of additional funds is significantly
behind schedule,” she added.
Eunice Muthamia of the public relations office at
the Ministry of Finance said, however, that the ministry
had done its part and the blame lay elsewhere.
The ministry is the principal recipient of these
funds, which are then distributed to the various
implementing agencies — mainly the Ministry of
Health and National Aids Control Council, though
some of it trickles down to NGOs. The ministry and
the council are supposed to account to the Treasury,
while Kanco does so through the council.
The consortium’s Lenya says they have already
submitted their narrative and financial reports to
the council.
Because of the delay, programmes that were supposed
to have been implemented by the end of this
month are more than four months behind schedule.
Council director Patrick Orege and the Ministry
of Health’s Tom Mboya say they have handed over
their reports to Treasury — four months ago in the
case of the council.
The money has yet to arrive three weeks to the
deadline of phase one of this round.
The ministry has been embroiled in controversy
over procurement processes and has a case pending
in court over HIV testing kits.
Orege says some of the delay may also be attributed
to the time taken to put up structures before
the programmes could kick off.
“When the Global Fund gave us money, we did
not have some systems in place and this led to
delays in starting our programmes,” he said. “We
are now working on ways to speed up movement of
money to implementators of programmes.”
Now a task force has been formed to look into
the cause of the delay, the implications and the
solution.
Slow movement of funds — even stagnation —
has been a chronic problem in Kenya. It has also
affected malaria and tuberculosis programmes.
At meeting in September that was chaired by
Zakary Ogongo, Permanent Secretary for health,
and attended by Kristin Kalla and Victor Bampoe
of the Global Fund, Kenya was warned that the
funding may be stopped.
Kalla, who has since left the fund, said the Kenyan
experience was marked by slow movement of
funds and low performance. “If something is not
done to improve the situation, the programme may
be suspended,” she is reported to have said.
The fund representative also said they were concerned
about financial management systems. Meetings
had been held with the minister for health,
during which three fundamentals were agreed —
the need is there, funds are available but delivery
processes are painfully slow.
The situation is no better when it comes to
malaria. On Monday, Director of medical services
James Nyikal told an international meeting in Nairobi
that all was well in the war against malaria, TB
and Aids.
He said Kenya had placed an order, albeit belatedly,
for several million permanent treated mosquito
nets through Unicef to manufacturers Vastergaard
Fandsen.
Still, Kenya could find itself without nets in the
next malaria season.
But, according to Michael Bjornlund, Vestergaard
Frandsen regional director for Europe and
Japan, Kenya has yet to place a firm order for the
nets. “The Unicef order does not conform with
our trading conditionalities,” Bjornlund told Horizon
in Nairobi. “We require that the buyer pays
30 per cent of the purchase price before production
commences but Unicef and other UN agencies
do not place a deposit for purchases.”
Health minister Charity Ngilu was reportedly
told of the urgency in placing orders for both nets
and the new malaria drugs called Artemisinin
Combination Treatment at a high level meeting
held in Paris recently.
Although it has been more than two years since
the Government adopted Coartem as the first line
drug in malaria treatment, it has yet to reach hospitals.
The lethargy in Government is a source of great
frustration in donor circles. Said Louis Da Gama
of Massive Effort Campaign, an international
organisation based in Swizerland: “If Population
Services International were not distributing nets
in Kenya, the situation would be extremely bad.”
PSI is funded directly by the British Department
for International Development. It sells the
nets at a highly subsidised price. “We are saying
here there is money to give your population nets
for free but several governments in Africa, including
Kenya, are not in a hurry to take up that
challenge,” Da Gama added.
NACC has held several meetings with the ministry
over the delayed funding. During the September
one chaired by Ogongo, members were
apprehensive that TB patients might go into crisis.
Though approved, according to the minutes, TB
funding had yet to be released, “despite the disease
being declared an emergency in the light of
multi-drug resistance strains. Any discontinuation
of treatment will be detrimental to all gains
made.”
The Government is poised to apply for an
extension of the programme for more than six
months at no cost to the Fund.
Because the delay in applying for the funds is of
the Government’s making, the understanding is
that it will absorb the costs of the extension,
including monitoring and evaluation of the programme.
NGOs are also expected to re-negotiate with
Ernst and Young for an extension to implement
their programmes.
Meanwhile, the council is now talking of seeking
direct support from the Global Fund and has
submitted a formal request to the Government.
This might be tall order as the Fund finances governments
and not piecemeal units within them.