Daily Nation/ Thursday August 25, 2005

Malaria lessons now introduced in 1,000 schools
CONTINUED FROM PAGE 31

nel districts of Makueni, Bondo, Kwale, Kisii and
Gucha, and involves about 100,000 class seven
pupils in about 1000 primary schools.
The programme sponsored by Population Services
International and supported by the local education
offices has already developed various teaching aids
and students’ materials.
“With many malaria endemic rural areas characterized
by illiteracy and poor access to information,
the program will use the pupils to disseminate ‘malaria
information’ within their families and communities,”
says Bernard Muthaka of PSI.
The new initiative, say Mr Muthaka is a wider
scheme to increase the usage of nets and consequently
reduce the incidence of malaria. Demand
for nets has increased dramatically since the Ministry
of Health introduced low-cost nets for mothers
attending ante-natal clinics. The nets are sold for
Sh50.
To cover the unexpected surge in demand the British
Department For International Development has
upped it funding to the programme. The increased
funding was announced recently by DFID’s director
for Africa, Mr Dave Fish at Ojolla dispensary in
Kisumu.
The British government is giving an additional 19.6
million pounds (about Sh2.6 billion), with most of it
going towards the purchase of more nets.
Ojolla dispensary is already selling 250 low-cost
nets every month. The long-lasting nets that do not
need re-treatment are being distributed through
antenatal clinics to pregnant mothers and children
below five years.
According to health officials, as a result of these
nets , attendance at antenatal clinics has been on a
steady rise, with many women visiting clinics in
order to get the low-cost nets. The clinic attendance
card acts as a voucher that enables one to buy
the net. In the commercial outlets, nets go for
between 100 and 320 shillings.
According to Ministry of Health sources, another
picture is emerging: immunization rates are increasing
as mothers attending ANC clinics are also getting
immunized, themselves and their children.
According to the Nyanza Provincial Medical of
Health, Ojolla dispensary has recorded a 38 per
cent increase in immunization rates since the nets
were introduced.
The programme started last year and about 250,000
nets are now being sold in various clinics across the
country. It is expected that by 2008, over 75 per
cent of the vulnerable population will have access
to long-lasting mosquito nets.
As the cost of treating malaria escalates due to the
high cost of effective drugs, malaria prevention is
being seen as the way forward for resource-poor
countries. Economists, including three Nobel Prize
winners, have determined that malaria prevention
is one of four “very good” uses of public funds, with
benefits exceeding costs by a factor of ten or me.