Daily Nation/ Wednesday, August 17, 2005

KEMRI - CGMRC
WELLCOME TRUST RESEARCH PROGRAMME,
KILIFI
Vacancy for Medical Officer
Interested in HIV Research
The Kenya Medical Research Institute (KEMRI) -Centre for
Geographic Medicine Research-Coast, and Wellcome Trust
programme in Kilifi, is recruiting a Medical Officer with a strong
interest in HIV research.
A newly established Out Patient Clinical Research Unit will facilitate
research of acute HIV infections and provide ARV treatment in close
collaboration with the Kilifi District Hospital.
The post of Medical Officer offers a challenging opportunity for highly
motivated and enthusiastic individuals. Clinical HIV/AIDS experience,
good inter-personal skills and flexibility are key requirements.
Interested Medical Officers should apply, preferably by email, and
include the following information; covering letter, photocopies of their
educational, professional certificates and testimonials, curriculum
vitae, together with telephone contact.
Vacancy for Clinical Trials Laboratory Manager
KEMRI-CGMRC / Wellcome Trust Programme is seeking a senior
laboratory scientist to manage the operations of its Clinical Trials
laboratory at Kilifi, Kenya.
The Centre has a strong history of performing trials in therapeutics
and clinical management, primarily in paediatric infectious diseases.
We have expanded our operations to undertake vaccine trials of
malaria and pneumococcal candidates, and more recently, large
scale HIV-1 vaccine feasibility studies.
Reporting to the Laboratory Director your primary
responsibilities will be:
1) To manage the operations and staff of the clinical trials
laboratory, that is, lead and direct all HIV/AIDS laboratory
activities including oversight of a large multi-centre acute HIV
infection study”;
2) Ensure that all necessary standards and procedures are
implemented to attain GCLP accreditation;
3) Liaise closely with senior investigators to ensure all trials are
planned and executed equally to the highest quality.
Requirements:
1) PhD or MSc in infectious diseases, plus HND in Medical
Laboratory Science;
2) Proven experience of bringing a clinical diagnostic laboratory up
to internationally recognised GCLP accreditable status;
3) Excellent managerial and supervisory skills.
4) Hands-on skills in diagnostic haematology, clinical chemistry,
microbiology and parasitology 5) Clinical laboratory research
experience in an international setting would be advantageous.
Terms of Appointment: Successful candidate will be appointed on a
one year renewable contract.
Salary: Commensurate with experience
Interested scientists should apply, preferably by email, and include
the following information, covering letter, curriculum vitae,
photocopies of educational & professional certificates & testimonials,
publications list, 3 references together with telephone contacts.
Closing date 31st August 2005. If you are not called for an
interview by the mid of September, please assume that you have not
been short listed.
Send your applications to the following address:
The Director
KEMRI CGMR-Coast,
P.O.Box 230,
Kilifi
Tel: 041 522063
Fax: 041 522390
Email:ssolomon@kilifi.mimcom.net