Daily Nation/ Wednesday, November 2, 2005

AMPATH
Academic Model For the Prevention and
Treatment of HIV/AIDS
P.O Box 4606, ELDORET 30100
VACANCY
The Academic Model for the Prevention and Treatment of HIV/AIDS (AMPATH) is a project under the partnership
of Moi University School of Medicine and Moi Teaching and Referral Hospital together with collaborating U.S.A
Medical Schools led by Indiana University School of Medicine as one of Kenya’s and Sub-Saharan Africa’s most
comprehensive HIV Initiatives. The overriding goal of AMPATH is to establish a working model of both urban and
rural comprehensive HIV preventive and treatment services. AMPATH has structured its patient care programs to
simultaneously provide HIV related teaching and research. AMPATH has also set up infrastructure and manpower
capable of effectively managing the complex issues surrounding antiretroviral therapy. Besides the treatment and
prevention programs, AMPATH also offers additional patient support initiatives that include; Treatment of
opportunistic infections, microeconomic support that prepares patients for income security, Nutritional support
while training patients on food security, Pilot programs are underway for t he support of children orphaned from
HIV positive parents, Carrying out research activities as well as offering psychosocial support.
Towards enhancement of its service delivery, the program is seeking qualified, energetic, highly motivated and
bright person to fill the following vacant position:-
PHARMACIST
The Role:
This is a research position at the AIDS Clinical Trials Unit. The successful candidate shall be reporting to the
Principal Investigator and shall be responsible for the following:-
• Dispense medication to research participants and maintain records of the transactions as required by
research protocols
• Establish internal policies and procedures for the safe and proper use of study products.
• Counsel study participants and family members on adherence to, proper use and storage of their
medications
• Handle the ordering, receiving and disposal of study drugs.
• Work with the other team members to check and ensure continued quality of research records and source
documents
Qualification & Experience
• A minimum of a Bachelor of Pharmacy Degree from a recognized University.
• Must be registered with the Kenya Pharmacy and Poison’s Board.
• A minimum of 2 years experience as a practicing pharmacist in a busy hospital setting.
• Should have experience in Anti-retroviral drug management at the hospital level.
• Should be well versed in drug importation and drug accountability.
• Should be able to draw adequate attention to detail, following research protocols without deviation and
capable of maintaining strict confidentiality.
• Should be able to work well in a multidisciplinary team, interact with primary care providers, hospital
departments and community agencies.
• Should have IT experience, proficiency in MS Word, Excel and use of the Internet.
• Should take initiative, be creative, and possess problem-solving skills.
• Prior experience in research will be an added advantage.
Terms of Employment
Successful candidate will be employed on a 1-year renewable contract basis with a competitive salary and
allowances.
Candidates meeting the above requirements and interested in the position should forward their applications with
an indication of their salary expectations, curriculum vitaes and academic and professional certificates to:-
The Director,
AMPATH Centre
P.O. Box 4606
ELDORET
So as to reach him not later than 16th November, 2005.
Candidates are reminded to advise their referees to submit their letters of Reference before the closing date.
NB. ONLY SHORTLISTED CANDIDATES SHALL BE CONTACTED.