Daily Nation/ Wednesday, May 11, 2005

ADRA Officially Launches HIV and AIDS Project in Kenya and Tanzania
NAIROBI, KENYA: The Adventist Development and Relief Agency (ADRA) is officially
launching an Abstinence and Behaviour Change for Youth (ABY) project on May 11th, 2005,
in Kisumu, Kenya, starting at 9am at Jomo Kenyatta Sports Ground. The launch is open to the
general public.
Through a five year grant of US$9,988,960 from the American people awarded by the United
States Development Agency (USAID), the project will be implemented through a consortium of
HIV and AIDS prevention strategy from October 2004 to September 2009 in Kenya and
Tanzania, mainly in the Lake Victoria region.
The ABY project will expand skills-based HIV training for youth; facilitate positive community
discourse on HIV/AIDS; and reinforce the role of parents and other protective influences.
Project activities include reaching one million youth and adults with messages on abstinence,
fidelity, and partner reduction, as well as avoidance of harmful behaviours such as coercive
and transactional sex. An additional five million youth and adults will receive HIV and AIDS
prevention education through the public media at national level.
Key partners include government ministries of education, health and gender, sports, culture
and social services (Kenya) and Labour and Youth (Tanzania), East-Central Division of the
Seventh-day Adventist Church (East African and Tanzania Unions) and other faith based
organizations within the project’s areas of operation. The project will operate within the policy
guidelines provided by the National AIDS Control Council (NACC) and Tanzania Commission
for AIDS (TACAIDS).
ADRA is a non-governmental organization (NGO) with a presence in more than 125 countries
worldwide. ADRA’s purpose is to develop human capacity, increase self-reliance, and
empower communities to meet crisis or chronic distress. ADRA works to achieve positive
change without regard to ethnicity or religious affiliation. ADRA seeks to build a future that is
characterized by equity, opportunity, informed choice, responsible stewardship of resources,
and individual and collective security.
For detailed project information on ADRA’s ABY project, contact:
George Baiden Max Church
ADRA Country Director, Kenya ADRA Country Director, Tanzania
P. O. 76273-00508 USA River
Nairobi - Kenya P. O. Box 1121
Vanga Rd, off Gitanga Rd, Opposite Ratna Apartments Arusha – Tanzania
Tel: +254 20 577365, 577572, 576898, 574239 Tel: +255 27 2553842
www.adrakenya.org www.adratz.org