Daily Nation/ Wednesday, July 13, 2005

COAST WATER SERVICES BOARD- (CWSB)
EXPRESSION OF INTEREST
Pre- qualification For Support Organizations For
Rural Water And Sanitation Projects.
The Coast Water Services Board is one of the Seven Water Service Boards established
under the Water Sector Reform Programme through the Water Act 2002. The Board
was officially gazetted on 15/2/2004 and mandated to provide efficient and economical
Water Supply and Sanitation Services to the people of Coast Region. The region covers
Lamu, Tana River, Malindi, Kilifi, Kwale, Mombasa and Taita Taveta Districts.
Purpose of Expression of Interest
In order to enhance CWSB’s capacity to support the improvement of Water & Sanitation
Services among the rural communities, the Government of Kenya under the Kenya
Water and Sanitation Programme (KWSP) has provided some funds to the Board.
KWSP is a joint initiative by the Governments of Kenya, Denmark and Sweden whose
aim is to support the ongoing water sector reforms as well as assist in the improvement
of rural water and sanitation conditions.
In this regard, the CWSB intends to use part of the funds to employ the services of
experienced, competent and qualified Support Organization (SOs) and Quality
Monitoring Organizations (QMO) operating in its area of jurisdiction to assist community
groups in the following specific areas:
• Assessment of their Water Supply and Sanitation needs.
• Preparation of viable project proposals for funding.
• Provision of support during planning, design and implementation of Water Supply
and Sanitation Projects.
• Implementation of Capacity Building activities (e.g. management, operations and
maintance, hygiene, education and promotion etc)
• Incorporation of cross cutting issues e.g. HIV / AIDS awareness, poverty eradication
and Environmental conservation in their activities.
• Supervision and Monitoring of project implementation activities.
• Quality Assurance of construction and other works.
• Provision of follow- up support to community projects during post implementation
period.
• Procurement of Construction Materials
• Preparation of WSPs Strategic Plans
Interested SOs/QMOs must provide information demonstrating.
• Legal status- Certificate of registration must be attached.
• Technical, Managerial & Financial Capabilities
• Existence or operation for more than one year.
• Expert qualification and experience of key personnel as well as similar assignments
previously undertaken. SOs/QMOs already working in the region will have an added
advantage.
All interested organizations are requested to send their Expression of interested letters
to the under-signed not later than 30th July 2005 at 12.00 noon.
Those considered for registration with the Board will be notified accordingly. All those
interested are reminded that this does not in anyway constitute a contractual
commitment with the requesting agent whatsoever.
Send Submission to: -
The Chief Executive Officer,
Coast Water Services Board,
P.O Box 90417-80100
MOMBASA