Daily Nation/ Friday, October 7, 2005

VACANCY
The Partners In Prevention, HSV/HIV transmission study, Eldoret Site is aimed at recruiting discordant
couples for “Phase III Randomized Placebo-Controlled Trial of HSV-2 Suppression to Prevent HIV
Transmission among HIV-Discordant Couples” within the next 3 years. The Site wishes to recruit personnel
for the following posts: -
Position of Study Director:
• Reporting to the Eldoret Site Principal Investigator.
Qualifications:
1. MBChB or equivalent and registered with Kenya Medical Practitioners and Dentist Board to Practice in
Kenya.
2. MPH from a recognized University.
3. At least 2 years working experience in a community based health research, preferably working in the area of
HIV/AIDS prevention.
Responsibilities
1. Harmonizes work outputs by the community mobilization unit to that of counselling and clinical units by
liaising with the behavioural, VCT and Clinical consultants to achieve study subject enrolment and retention
targets.
2. Suggests solutions to community mobilization, screening (VCT) and enrolment problems on a day-to-day
basis in liaison with the study coordinator.
3. Evaluates on a regular basis the personnel and logistical needs of the whole study team and recommends
action as appropriate.
4. Works with the study coordinator to achieve quality output in all technical aspects of the study.
5. Works with the PI and the Clinical Consultant, in consultation with the Study Coordinator to ensure: prompt
required reporting to all stakeholders, update of all regulatory requirements such as import and export
permits and IRB/IREC approvals.
Crosscutting skills required for the above vacancy
a. Excellent leadership, interpersonal and teamwork.
b. Ability to work in a rapidly changing working environment.
c. Excellent innovative skills in problem solving.
d. Excellent communication skills (spoken and written English and Swahili).
e. Computer literacy (proficient in word processing and statistical packages).
Terms of Service:
• A competitive package commensurate with experience shall be offered.
• A one-year contract renewable on mutual agreement for a total of three years.
• If you are qualified for the above post, send your detailed CV and supportive documents to the
undersigned on or before 30th June 2005.
• Only short listed candidates will be communicated to.
The Coordinator and Administrator
HSV/HIV Transmission Study
Moi Teaching and Referral Hospital
2nd Floor Room 239
P.O. Box 4606-30100
ELDORET