Daily Nation/ Wednesday, May 25, 2005

VACANCY ANNOUNCEMENT
KEMRI/CDC PROGRAM
Program description: The KEMRI/CDC is a collaboration between Kenya Medical Research
Institute and the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. We conduct research in
malaria, HIV and other diseases while also providing support for HIV and TB programs
throughout Nyanza Province and western Kenya. Due to continued growth, the program has
vacancies in the following positions.
• Position: Senior Research Officer (Snr Behavioral Scientist) - Head, HIV/AIDS Behavioral
Science Section
Vacancy Number: E022
Reporting to: Chief, HIV/AIDS Research Branch
Qualifications: PhD in Sociology, Anthropology, Population Studies/Demography, or other
behavioral/social sciences.
Experience: Minimum 6 years experience in behavioral science-related research, with emphasis
in HIV/AIDS, STIs, reproductive health required. Experience with community mobilization and
sensitization and experience in supervising Masters level students preferred.
Skills and Abilities: Quantitative and qualitative data analysis; strong computer skills in word
processing, spreadsheets, and statistical programs required. Ability to conduct needs assessments
and evaluations, and skills in report writing required.
Basic Function: Guide behavioral science activities related to HIV research and Global AIDS
Program activities. Manage and direct the Behavioral Science Section.
• Position: Research Officer (Behavioral Scientist) - HIV/AIDS Behavioral Science Section
Vacancy Number: E021
Reporting to: Chief, HIV/AIDS Research Branch
Qualifications: Masters Degree in Sociology, Anthropology, or other fields related to Behavioral
Social Sciences.
Experience: Minimum 5 years experience in community-based research, with at least 1 year of
socio-behavioral HIV/AIDS, STI or reproductive health experience. Experience with community
mobilization and sensitization.
Skills and Abilities: Excellent skills in quantitative and qualitative data analysis required; strong
computer skills in word processing, spreadsheets, and statistical computer programs required;
excellent management, supervision, and communication skills necessary; ability to collaborate
with counterparts including other KEMRI/CDC research sections, Government of Kenya,
non-governmental organizations, community-based organizations, and other donor-supported
projects; report writing skills.
Basic Function: Function independently to facilitate behavioral science activities related to HIV
research and Global AIDS Program activities.
For all positions:
Location: These positions are located in Kisumu, Kenya.
Language Proficiency: Excellent written and verbal English required. Fluency in Kiswahili and
Dholuo preferred.
Terms of Service: Contract for 1 year, renewable as per KEMRI scheme of service. Probation
period first 3 months.
Remuneration: Compensation is negotiable within a relevant grade, based on educational levels,
relevant experience and demonstrated competency. The salary scheme is based on the KEMRI
scales plus supplemental amounts.
Applications are due NO LATER THAN 21ST OCTOBER, 2005.
Send to: The Human Resources Manager, KEMRI/CDC Program, P.O. Box 1578, Kisumu
Applications should include the following:
• Letter of application (clearly indicate position applied for and vacancy number)
• Current resume or curriculum vitae
• Contact telephone number
• Copies of certificates and testimonials
• Name and contact of 2-3 referees