Daily Nation/ Friday, December 16, 2005

MASENO UNIVERSITY
Degree programmes offered by the University

loans, bursaries, work-study and Student Welfare activity
programmes, among others. It serves as a link between
the university administration and the student fraternity.
The office liaises with the general public on matters
affecting individual and groups of students and supports
students’ participation in community services
Maseno University Aids Control Unit (MUACU)
Maseno University Aids Control Unit was established in
2001 as a branch of the Commission for Higher Education
(CHE) AIDS Control Unit. The aim of establishing the unit
was to offer HIV/AIDS prevention and care services to the
University students, staff dependants and the surrounding
communities. Specifically the unit offers the following
services:
 Voluntary Counselling and Testing (VCT) in a modern
VCT facility.
 Home based care to the infected and affected people
 Prevention of Mother to Child Transmission of HIV
(PMTCT)
 Youth peer education programme in collaboration with I
CHOOS LIFE (ICL)
 Provision of antiretroviral drugs
 Research in HIV/Aids
The unit, located in Siriba Campus, is coordinated by
the School of Public Health and Community Development
under the guidance of multidisciplinary steering committee
whose members are drawn from all the faculties, schools,
centers, sections and student body within the university.
Implementation of the HIV/AIDs prevention and care
activities is guided by a policy document that was
developed by the steering committee.
I Choose Life (ICL)
Over 164 students and 10 members of staff of Maseno
University were commissioned as HIV/Aids Peer
Educators in a ceremony held at the Siriba Campus on 1st
April 2005. This is one of the projects of I Choose Life –
Africa. The students are tasked with providing guidance to
fellow students, facilitating meetings of peer educators and
general administration of ICL project.
Kisumu City Campus
The city campus has a unique setting in the heart of the
beautiful Kisumu City. We operate within a secure and
conducive environment with easy access to the internet,
postal, medical, recreational, banking and transport
services. The scenic Lake Victoria shores and the Kisumu
Museum, both useful for social and academic tours, are
within a few minutes walk. The professional oriented
library services, enhanced by Internet, are supplemented
by the nearby Kenya National Library Services (Kisumu
Branch).
We offer market driven academic and professional
programmes including the latest in IT and Computer
Applications at certificate, undergraduate and
postgraduate levels. The flexible study schemes provide
for:
Full time:
Day release; evening;
Part time:
Day release; evening; holiday; online, tuition according to
the needs of the individual students.
There are also options for:
Accelerated study schemes
DEGREE PROGRAMMES
Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences
1. Ph.D. in Economics
2. Ph.D. in Philosophy
3. Ph.D. in Religion
4. Master in Business Administration
5. MA In Linguistics
6. MA In Human Resource Management
7. MA in Creative and performing Arts, (Music & Theater
Studies)
8. MA in (History)
9. MA In (Geography)
10. MA In (Religion and Theology)
11. MA In Social Development and Management
12. Postgraduate Diploma in Human Resource
Management
13. Bachelor of Arts with IT
14. Bachelor of Business Administration with IT
15. Bachelor of Arts Sociology and Anthropology with IT
16. Bachelor of Arts in Design with IT
17. Bachelor of Arts (Communication and Media
Technology with IT)
18. Bachelor of Arts (Creative and Performing Arts with IT)
Faculty of Education
19. M.Ed. in Educational Psychology (Sandwich/Regular)
20. M.Ed. in Planning and Economics of Education
(Sandwich /Regular)
21. M.Ed. in Educational Administration
(Sandwich/Regular)
22. M.Ed. in Educational Foundations (Sandwich/Regular)
23. M.Ed. in Curriculum Studies(Regular/Sandwich)
24. Ph.D. in Educational Technology
25. Ph.D. in Curriculum Studies
26. Ph.D. in Evaluation of Educational Programs
27. Bachelor of Arts (Education with IT)
28. Bachelor of Science (Education with IT)
29. Bachelor of Special Education with IT
Faculty of Science
30. Ph.D. in Horticulture
31. Ph.D. in Mathematics
32. Ph.D. in Cell and Molecular Biology
33. Ph.D. in Chemistry
34. Ph.D. in Botany
35. Ph.D. in Aquatic Sciences
36. M.Sc. (Plant Physiology and Biochemistry)
37. M.Sc. (Plant pathology)
38. M.Sc. (Plant Taxonomy and Economic Botany)
39. M.S.c. (Genetics)
40. M.Sc. (Microbiology)
41. M.Sc. (Developmental Botany)
42. M.Sc.in Cell and Molecular Biology
43. M.Sc. (Zoology)
44. M.Sc. In aquatic Sciences
45. M.Sc. In Plant Ecology
46. M.Sc. (Agro forestry)
47. M.Sc. in Physics (Theoretical and experimental)
48. M.Sc. (Pure Mathematics)
49. M.Sc. (Applied Mathematics)
50. M.Sc. (Applied Statistics)
51. M.Sc. Chemistry
52. M.Sc. (Horticulture)
53. MSc.(Plant Breeding)
54. M.Sc. (Pomology)
55. M.Sc. (Floriculture)
56. M.Sc. (Olericulture)
57. M.Sc. (Environmental Horticulture)
58. M.Sc. (Soil and Water Management )
59. M.Sc. Hospitality Management
60. Postgraduate Diploma in Computer Sciences
61. B.Sc. (Basic Sciences) with IT
62. B.Sc. (Applied Statistics with IT)
63. B.Sc. (Actuarial Sciences with IT)
64. B.Sc. (Computer Science and Engineering)
65. B.Sc. (Horticulture with IT)
66. B.Sc. (Eco-tourism, Hotel and Institution Management
with IT)
School of Development and Strategic Studies
67. PhD. in Political Science
68. MA in Political Science
69. MA in International Relations
School of Environment and Earth Sciences
70. PhD. in Planning
71. PhD. in Geography
72. MA in Geography
73. MA in Project Planning & Management
74. M.Sc. in Urban Environmental Planning &
Management
75. Postgraduate Diploma in Project Planning and
Management
76. B.A. in Urban and Regional Planning with IT
77. B.Sc. in Environmental Studies with IT
78. B.Sc. in Earth Sciences with IT
School of Public Health and Community Development
79. PhD. Biomedical Sciences & Technology
80. M.Sc. Community Nutrition
81. M.Sc. Biomedical Sciences & Technology
82. B.Sc. Biomedical Sciences with IT
Kisumu City Campus
83. MA in Project Planning & Management
84. M.Sc. in Urban Environmental Planning &
Management
85. Master in Business Administration
86. MA In Social Development and Management
87. MPH in Management of Health Systems
88. MPH in Epidemiology and Population Health
89. MPH. in Health Promotion and International Health
90. Postgraduate Diploma in Project Planning and
Management
91. Postgraduate Diploma in Human Resource
Management
92. Postgraduate Diploma in Education
93. Bachelor of Business Administration with IT
94. Bachelor of Arts (Sociology) with IT
Daily Nation/ Friday, December 16, 2005 39