Daily Nation / Friday, December 9, 2005
Gender Based Violence Effect on Women’s Participation in the Economy

Women in Kenya remain a marginalized
portion of the population despite their
numerical strength, a situation, which is
reinforced by existing laws and policies, as well as
social-cultural factors. This state of affairs has led to a
situation of gross gender based inequity and
inequalities. Despite the fact that women in Kenya
make up 50.5% of the population, they tend to be underrepresented
in all development sectors. Persistent and
pervasive gender inequalities hinder access to and
control of resources while perpetuating unequal
distribution of resources with great bias to women. This
in effect contributes to social insecurity, lack of
opportunity and instills a deep sense of powerlessness,
lowering quality life for both men and women.
One of the issues identified as a factor hindering such
participation is violence against women. Violence
against women is an obstacle to the achievement of the
objectives of equality, development and peace.
Violence against women both violates and impairs or
nullifies the enjoyment by women of their human rights
and fundamental freedoms.
The United Nations Declaration on the Elimination of
Violence Against Women defines gender-based
violence as 'a form of discrimination that seriously
inhibits women's ability to enjoy rights and freedoms on
a basis of equality with men'. It is directed against a
woman because she is a woman and includes any act
that results in or is likely to result in physical, sexual, or
psychological harm or suffering to women, including
threats of such acts, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of
liberty, whether occurring in public or private life. This
can be in terms of rape, sexual harassment, indecent
assault, family or domestic violence, defilement, female
genital cutting, institutionalized violence such as police
brutality on female offenders, wife inheritance,
femicide, murder, forced marriages and mistreatment of
the less fortunate members of the society such as
prostitutes, house girls and female refugees.
Women in Kenya experience these forms of violence
in there everyday lives. Unfortunately, violence against
women in Kenya has elicited little or no response from
society and or government and has had been dealt with
as a predominantly “women issue”. Yet violence against
women and girls is a global epidemic that affects the
health and economic stability of women, their families,
and their communities.
Victims of violence are often unable or afraid to seek
health care, and the violence in their lives often
prevents them from participating in the social and
economic life of their communities. Recent statistics
have shown that women who have been victims of
violence are twice as likely as women who were not
victims of violence to have poor health and physical
and mental health problems, even if the violence
occurred many years ago.
Research has consistently shown that violence against
women has serious consequences on maternal mortality
and child survival. Women battered during pregnancy
risk losing there lives and that of the unborn child or are
likely to deliver children with physical, mental or
psychological complications.
Emerging studies show a strong relationship between
domestic violence and the spread of HIV/AIDS in the
developing world. The combination of violence and
poverty forces many women to remain in violent and
dangerous relationships where they are often subjected
to rape and HIV infection by their HIV-positive
partners. Gender based violence also affects educational
attainment and imposes obstacles to the full
participation of women in social, economic and
political life.
Although gender-based violence affects women of all
classes, poverty and lack of education are additional
risk factors. Increasing levels of education can help
prevent violence by empowering young women.
Research has also indicated that women who are
economically independent are less susceptible to
violence.
Over the past 10 years, governments across the globe
have sought a solution to end violence against women
and ensure that women are put at the forefront of each
nations development agenda. Of significant importance
is the Beijing Platform for Action that was adopted in
Beijing, China at the Fourth World Conference on
Women in 1995 and the United Nations Millennium
Declaration that was adopted in September 2000 at
United Nations Millennium Summit by 191 Member
states of the United Nations.
The Beijing Platform for Action is an Agenda for
Women’s empowerment and aims at advancing the
rights of women and at removing all obstacles in the
public and private spheres through a full and equal
share in economic, social, cultural and political
decision-making. It embodies the commitment of the
international community to the advancement and
empowerment of women and to gender equality. The
Platform for Action sets out measures for national,
regional and international action in twelve critical areas
of concern: women and poverty; women in education
and training; women and health; violence against
women; women in armed conflict; women and the
economy; women in power and decision-making;
institutional mechanisms; human rights; media;
environment, and the girl child.
The UN Millennium Declaration represents a global
political commitment towards the promotion of
sustainable human development, peace and security,
human rights, democracy and good governance. The
Declaration sets out 8 UN Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs) as a road map to implementing the
Declaration namely; Eradicate extreme poverty and
hunger; Achieve universal primary education; Promote
gender equality and empower women; Reduce child
mortality; Improve maternal health; Combat
HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases; Ensure
environmental sustainability and Develop a global
partnership for development. In order to measure and
monitor progress, mobilize political commitment and
initiate concrete action, 16 global targets and 48 global
indicators were established.
Goal 3 of the MDGs calls for gender equality and
empowerment as effective ways to combat poverty,
hunger and disease and to stimulate development that is
truly sustainable. Gender equality and the
empowerment of women are therefore considered to be
both objectives in themselves and means to achieve
overall progress in development. The target associated
with MDG 3 has a narrow focus, aiming at the
elimination of gender disparity in primary and
secondary education preferably by 2005, and at all
levels by 2015. The four indicators in turn focus on the
ratio of girls to boys in primary, secondary and tertiary
education; the ratio of literate females to males of 15-
to-24-year-olds; the share of women in wage
employment in the non-agricultural sector; and the
proportion of seats held by women in national
parliaments. These and most of the targets and
indicators established for the other MDGs, are
addressed in specific objectives under different critical
areas of concern in the Platform for Action.
Gender-based violence exacts enormous costs to the
country’s economy, to women’s health, and to women’s
rights and directly jeopardizes the achievement of the
all the MDGs. Gender-based violence directly
jeopardizes the achievement of MDGs related to gender
equality and empowerment of women, infant mortality,
maternal health and mortality and combating
HIV/AIDS. Under the Platform for Action violence
against women’s jeopardizes realization of the 12
critical areas of concern.
Gender disparities continue to exist in land ownership
systems. Kenya being an agricultural economy land is
the primary asset and resource for both men and
women, yet it is men who largely own and control it. In
fact land is the key collateral for credit, without which
bank loans cannot be sourced. Inability to access credit
simply aggravates women’s poverty situation. This
situation makes women entirely dependent on men.
Many women are therefore forced to remain in abusive
relationships due to there economic dependency and
inability to own assets.
HIV/AIDS infections over the last five years show
more women being infected than men. Women’s lives
are at a greater risk of contracting HIV/AIDS. Women
are not in a position to negotiate safe sex and are
exposed to violence from all spheres. Recent research
findings placed women at 24% of contracting
HIV/AIDS. This, the National policy on AIDS has said
is not a health problem but a development concern that
threatens the very fabric of society.
Although no single intervention will eliminate
violence against women, a combination of
infrastructural, legal, judicial, enforcement,
educational, health and other service-related actions can
significantly reduce it and its consequences. For that to
happen, however, violence against women must be
viewed as unacceptable violence against women is still
relatively invisible because it typically occurs with
households walls. Furthermore, many people view it as
a routine and even acceptable feature of relationships
between men and women.
Young girls are at risk of violence at school due to
insecurity while walking to school or from teachers
making the school environment unsafe for girls. This in
turn affects enrollment in schools by girls for fear that
they will be abused. In higher levels of leaning young
girls experience violence in the of sexual favour for
good grades!!
Violence against women exacts enormous indirect
costs. These costs, while hard to measure, inevitably
have a profound impact on the economy because of
women’s lower productivity and diminished quality of
life. The violence affects the economy by reducing
women’s labor market participation and productivity
resulting in lowering earnings, savings and investment.
Violence also erodes personal relationships and quality
of life, both for victims and children who witness
violence. Abused women often are socially isolated,
preventing them from participating in community and
income-earning activities, and perhaps most important
robbing them of the social interaction that might help
end the abuse. Moreover, children tend to imitate
violent behavior that they see or experience,
perpetuating the cycle from one generation to the next.
To effectively deal with gender-based violence in
Kenya the government needs to enact laws protecting
women and punishing perpetrators of violence. This
will go a long way to reduce poverty status in the
country and stimulate development that is truly
sustainable. There is therefore urgent need to address
gender-based violence not only as an issue affecting
women but as a development concern. Unless and until
gender- based violence is addressed sustainable
development in Kenya remains elusive more so the
achievement of the MDGs and the realization of the
Platform for Action.