Daily Nation/Friday, September 16, 2005
PROGRAM OFFICER

An international NGO involved in AIDS control, prevention and care activities in Kenya and
in the East and Central Africa Region invites applications for the position of a Program
Officer, based in Nairobi.
Key Responsibilities:
1. Provides programmatic support to the design, implementation, and evaluation of the
program.
2. Supports the design and development of agreements with implementing partners and
provides on-going monitoring of these activities.
3. Provides technical support to projects in the areas of management, finance and specific
technical areas.
4. Assists in annual workplan and budget development and provides leadership in meeting
programmatic and financial reporting requirements.
5. Builds capacity of implementing partners to manage HIV/AIDS programming through
project design, monitoring and management.
6. Develops, oversees, coordinates and supervise country specific activities in a regional
HIV/AIDS program
7. Links with field based site coordinators
Qualifications and Experience:
• Knowledge of and experience in HIV/AIDS programming in East and Central Africa.
• Ability to manage projects, set realistic priorities, and plan for the successful
implementation of programs.
• Sensitivity to cultural differences and understanding of the political and ethical issues
surrounding HIV infection.
• Strong writing, verbal and analytical skills.
• Ability to work well with others and to develop and maintain compatibility among
project staff, subcontractors, consultants and implementing partners.
• Ability to travel regionally and internationally.
• Strong working knowledge of computer programs: Microsoft Word, Excel, PowerPoint
etc.
Minimum Recruitment Standards:
• MA in public health or social sciences plus five years experience with international
development programs.
• Minimum of five years experience in design, management and monitoring of HIV/AIDS
programs in East and Central Africa.
• Regional experience and fluency in French preferred.
If you meet the above requirements, send your cover letter and CV/resume to the address
hereunder so as to be received not later than 30th September 2005. Kindly note that only
shortlisted persons will be contacted. Handwritten applications will be disqualified. No
phone calls please!
The Human Resources Officer
P.O. Box 38835-00623
Nairobi