Daily Nation/ Friday, April 1, 2005

VACANCIES
HelpAge International is a global network of not-for-profit organisations working with and for
disadvantaged older people to improve the quality of their lives. The organisation’s Regional
Development Centre for Africa (ARDC), in Nairobi is seeking highly motivated individuals for the
following positions:
A. Regional Programme Coordinator - HIV/AIDS: Manage HelpAge International’s HIV/AIDS work in
Africa and ensure the effective design, development, implementation and evaluation of HIV/AIDS
programmes that meet the expressed needs of older people, provide lessons for HAI and others and
raise the issues regarding the impact of HIV/AIDS on older people to a wider audience.
Educated to degree level, you will have at least seven (7) years working experience in the HIV/AIDS
field, with five (5) of those being in an NGO setting. You will have an in-depth understanding of
HIV /AIDS and related issues in a developing country. You will have experience in advocating issues
at the highest level including among governments, donors and other international agencies. Strong
communications, coordination, report writing and budget management skills are critically important.
B. Regional Programme Coordinator: Manage HelpAge International’s development programmes in
Africa and ensure the effective design, development, implementation and evaluation of poverty
reduction programmes that meet the expressed needs of older people, provide lessons for HAI and
others and raise the issues regarding the impact of well-targeted poverty reduction programmes to a
wider audience.
Educated to degree level, you will have at least five (5) years working experience in the work of
NG0s, especially International. You will have an in-depth understanding of issues affecting older
people in Africa and supporting partner organisations, especially in building their capacity. You will
have experience in advocating issues at the highest level including among governments, donors and
other international agencies. Strong communications, coordination, report writing and budget
management skills are critically important.
C. Projects Officer: Provide programme development support of the HIV/AIDS work in the ARDC and
HAI and support partner organisations in designing, implementing, monitoring and evaluating
HIV/AIDS programmes.
Applicants should be educated to degree level; have at least five (5) years experience of work with
NG0s; three of them working on HIV/AIDS issues; excellent knowledge of English; written and oral
communication skills; good computer skills; strong administrative skills; experience of compiling and
disseminating information; experience of preparing funding proposals and monitoring budgets.
Candidates for the above three positions will need to have a good grasp of English and have
excellent written and communication skills. Ideally, you will have a working knowledge of French or
Arabic.
D. Assistant Accountant: The role involves the accounting and reporting of budget and expenditures
in the HIV/AIDS programmes in the ARDC and providing support to partner organisations.
An accounting qualification, in addition to at least five (5) years relevant work experience, excellent
English and advanced knowledge of Excel are required.
Applicants should send their application letters and curriculum vitae to: HelpAge International, P.O
Box 14888 - 00800, Nairobi, Kenya, Fax: +254 20 4441052 Email:helpage@helpage.co.ke
Applications should be received by14th April, 2005.
Only short-listed applicants will be responded to.