Applications are hereby invited from qualified Kenyans to fill the below mentioned position,
based in our Regional Delegation, in Nairobi.
Senior Health Officer: Ref No. RD/SHO/HCU/11/2005.
SENIOR HEALTH OFFICER
Purpose:
The Senior Health Officer will be part of a team of experts in Public Health, Water and
Sanitation and HIV/AIDS. The Health and Care Unit supports 14 National Societies in
Daily Nation/ Wednesday, November 16, 2005
RED CROSS AND RED CRESCENT
Eastern Africa in the implementation of the African Red Cross and Red Crescent Health
Initiative (ARCHI) strategy for 2010, which focuses on HIV/AIDS, Childhood illnesses,
Sexual and Reproductive Health, Blood donor recruitment, First Aid and Emergency
preparedness and response.
Target profile and Skills:
A University Degree or higher Diploma in Public Health, Nursing, Community Development,
Medical or Social Sciences. Must have: a clinical background; strong background in HIV
and AIDS Programming; a good understanding of IMCI, child survival and SRH; experience
in Health Management at country or regional level; a strong background in Monitoring and
Evaluation and proficiency in project cycle management. In addition he/she should have a
background in nutrition and/or food security and livelihoods; experience of working in an
International Development Organization and a working knowledge of French. Experience
working in Horn of Africa countries and Health in emergencies will be an added advantage.
The Federation seeks to be an equal opportunity employer. Interested parties must submit
their applications quoting the vacancy numbers mentioned above, enclosing a detailed
Curriculum vitae, including telephone contact, current remuneration, and full details of three
referees and copies of testimonials/certificates.
Please submit your application to the address below, on or before 30th November 2005.
Regional Human Resources Manager, P.O. Box 41275 Nairobi,
or e-mail, pamela.mokaya@ifrc.org.
Please note that only short listed candidates will be contacted.