DAILY NATION 21 MARCH, 2005

‘Only draconian
laws can curtail
spread of Aids’
Aids is no longer a matter of figures and statistics. Today, we are
all counting the number of loved ones lost to the disease, or the ones we are
nursing owing to it. Maybe, even we ourselves are infected. We have all
seen the ugly face of Aids up close.
Now that the paramount function of the law is to protect society from
internal and external threats, is Kenya doing enough to contain the Aids
scourge?
Well over two decades after the advent of HIV-Aids, it is undoubtedly the
biggest threat facing our nation today. But our laws remain disturbingly
aloof to this grave menace to society.
The HIV and Aids Prevention and Control Bill, 2003 (aka the Rachier
Bill), which will be the first specific legislation, is yet to pass through the
august House.
A report released by UNAids earlier this month says funding will not tame
Aids but bold measures will.
We have all heard cases of people who, when they discover they are
infected with the deadly virus, go on a frantic sex spree to infect others.
There is no reason why a person who commits this heinous act should not
be held responsible for the death of unsuspecting victims. But, in law, such a
person would not be found guilty of murder, attempted murder or even
manslaughter.
Section 186 of the Penal Code (Cap 63, Laws of Kenya), provides that “any
person who unlawfully or negligently does any act which is, and which he
knows or has reason to believe to be, likely to spread the infection of any
disease dangerous to life, is guilty of a misdemeanour.”
This provision, which dates back to colonial days, no doubt had in mind less
deadly diseases like gonorrhoea, measles and scabies. Compared to Aids,
they are minor irritations.
The Rachier Bill on Aids, whose preamble states its objective as, “to
provide measures for the prevention, management and control of HIV and
Aids; to provide for protection and promotion of public health..., and for
connected purposes,” lacks bold provisions to combat Aids. It, therefore,
might not make much of a difference.
The most significant legislation in relation to Aids is the Public Health Act
(Cap 242, Laws of Kenya). However, despite the objective of this law, as
captured by its preamble: “to make provision for securing and maintaining
health,” it contains no specific provision on Aids.
In fact, in the entire 209 pages of the Substantive and Subsidiary
Legislation, not a single mention of HIV/Aids is made.
This is despite the fact that the Act was amended and revised recently.
The provisions of this Act could easily be construed to
apply to any disease affecting man and beast alike
Nonetheless, this Act does, by necessary implication, apply to Aids. In fact,
given their broad spectrum, the provisions of this Act could easily be
construed to apply to any disease affecting man and beast alike.
Quite regrettably, however, the regime of the Public Health Act, despite its
extensive provisions, has not been put to any meaningful use in the fight
against Aids. Perhaps if we had taken advantage of the provisions of this
Act we would be talking a different story today.
As for the bold measures necessary to curb the spread of Aids, first and
foremost, intentional spread of HIV ought to be specifically proscribed by
our Penal Code and upgraded to the status of a felony. The offence should
be made punishable by at least life imprisonment or even death.
Secondly, as a follow up to the already existing system of Voluntary
Counselling and Testing (VCT), we need to introduce a system of
compulsory testing whereby everyone would submit to a compulsory
annual HIV test carried out by the Ministry of Health.
A register containing the HIV status of all individuals would then be kept
at all government hospitals and made available for public inspection.
Certificates may also be issued to all persons tested showing their HIV
status.
This way, not only would it be relatively easy to ascertain the status of every
individual but it would also enable us to fully appreciate the extent of the
problem. We then would be able to put it into proper perspective. Knowing
what exactly we are dealing with will enable us to equip ourselves
accordingly.
Moreover, knowledge of one’s HIV status allows a person the benefit of
early treatment, if infected. And if negative, the resolve to be more careful,
hence reducing Aids mortality rates and curbing spread of the disease.
In the above programme, any person who fails to present himself for testing
would be liable to a penalty. In addition, the register would show that the
HIV status of the person is unknown.
All these measure could be carried out within the regime of the Public
Health Act as it currently stands. Nor would this exercise be
unconstitutional, for it would be in the interest of public health and safety.
Draconian as these measures sound, they might just be the bitter pill that
will cure our society of this pestilence. Experience has shown that countries
that have used their laws to prevent the spread of Aids have achieved very
good results.
Higher HIV infection rates have been reported in Russia, India and Cuba
after they relaxed their systems of compulsory testing.
Aids is a matter of life and death. The disease should be fought by all
means necessary.
It’s about time the law took its rightful place in the fight against this disease.
Writer Saitabao ole Kanchory is the executive director, Centre for
Juridical Research — saitabao@mail.lawguru.