Daily Nation/ Friday, June 10, 2005

GOAL Kenya Vacancy Announcement
GOAL Kenya Programme of Support for Children & Youth in Difficult
Circumstances is hereby inviting applicants for the position of
Programme Manager.
Principal Functions
Under the supervision of the Head of Programmes, the Programme
Manager will provide operational, management and administrative
supervision/direction to five projects, ensuring efficient utilization of
resources and effective implementation of the Programme initiatives.
Specific Duties
1. Responsible for overall management and implementation of the
activities of the projects.
2. Provide administrative support of the day to day running of the
programme activities.
3. Supervise the programme staff and participate, in close consultation
with HR and Head of Programmes in the recruitment, training and
management of staff as per GOAL guidelines.
4. Responsible for developing programme proposals, donor reports and
project planning tools.
5. Together with projects’ staff, identify programme opportunities and
needs and advise the organization accordingly.
6. Develop and maintain effective relationships with local communities,
leaders and other stakeholders in order to accomplish the goals and
objectives of the overall country Programme.
7. Responsible for monitoring performance to achieve project targets
and to ensure compliance of donor requirements.
8. Establish the Programme budgets in conjunction with the Head of
Programmes and Finance Department. Monitor and evaluate the
budgets on an ongoing basis.
9. Liaise with other like minded organizations in the children, youth and
HIV/AIDS sector and initiate collaborations and sustainable
partnerships.
Qualification and Experience
Candidate should posses a degree in Social Sciences or related field.
Minimum five years experience in managing programmes and budgets,
programme design & planning, programme implementation, monitoring &
evaluation. At least a minimum of 2 years experience working in the
children/youth sector.
Other competencies
• Strong analytical & supervisory skills
• Excellent and proven writing, communication and management
skills
• Proficiency in computer application packages (word processing,
spread sheet and a database application)
• Experience in managing partnership (implementation through
partners) programmes is desirable
• Experience in child rights, HIV & AIDS, gender and rights based
approach
• Strong analytical, inter personal and team building skills
• Capacity to perform under pressure with minimum supervision.
Applicants are invited to send a cover letter together with detailed
Curriculum Vitae to the Human Resources Officer, GOAL Kenya, and
P.O. Box 66242, Nairobi or via email: goal@goalkenya.org. Applicants
will be considered until 24th June, 2005.
Only short listed applicants meeting the above requirements will be
contacted.
QUALITY ASSURANCE COORDINATOR
East African Cables is one of the fastest growing public quoted companies.
We are a leading manufacturer of electrical cables and conductors and also
a distributor of data and telecommunication cables and accessories for the
East and Central Africa Region. We wishes to recruit a qualified, self-driven
and result oriented individual to fill the position of Quality Assurance
Coordinator. Reporting to the Quality Assurance Manager, key
responsibilities include:
• Carrying out physical inspections and checks on the quality and
packaging of