Daily Nation/ Friday, July 29, 2005
PROGRAMME MANAGER

AMREF is the largest health development organization based in Africa. Our mission is to improve
the health of disadvantaged people in Africa as a means for them to escape poverty and improve
the quality of their life. With headquarters in Kenya, AMREF has programmes in Ethiopia, Kenya,
South Africa, Tanzania, and Uganda. For more information please visit our website
www.amref.org
With a strategy focusing on capacity building, operations research and advocacy, AMREF Kenya
seeks to recruit a Programme Manager for:
MAANISHA – COMMUNITY FOCUSED INITIATIVE TO CONTROL HIV/AIDS IN NYANZA AND
WESTERN PROVINCES
AMREF Kenya is implementing a new and exiting programme in the lake Victoria region focusing on
capacity building of civil society organizations; grant making, providing HIV/AIDS technical support;
and strengthening of co-ordination mechanisms among all stakeholders including GOK structures.
We are looking for the following qualified and highly motivated staff to join the field team based in
AMREF Kisumu Office.
THE POSITION
Reporting to the HIV/AIDs Programme Manager/Team Leader - AMREF Kenya, the incumbent shall
be responsible for the overall management of the programme ensuring a motivated field team and
efficient management of resources, strategic focus, relevance and efficiency, and monitoring of all
related programme components.
Responsibilities
• Identify and develop HIV/AIDS related programme portfolio of projects in collaboration with
other relevant programme personnel and key stakeholders.
• Lead operations and develop research and advocacy activities in the programme.
• Manage programme planning, monitoring and evaluation and reporting.
• Coordinate programme activities and resources.
• Liaise and network with relevant AMREF partners and collaborators to improve AMREF’s
visibility, coordination of activities and promotion of shared advocacy agenda.
• Act as the focal point and champion for proposal development and new fund raising initiatives
for the programme.
• Manage staff development and performance
• Representing AMREF in partners and collaborators consultative meetings and managing
partner relationships
QUALIFICATIONS AND EXPERIENCE
• Masters degree in Public Health, Programme Management or related field
• Minimum 7 years post graduate and hands on experience in Public Health and Project
Programme Management in Health
• Demonstrated skills in Public Health, HIV/AIDS, Health Systems and Programme Development
including operations research and advocacy. NGO experience is an added advantage
• Strong interpersonal skills both as a team leader and player.
• Excellent communication skills– both written and oral and Computer Literacy.
If you feel that you meet the criteria send your details including remuneration requirements and
contact details of three work-related referees, to The Human Resources & Administration
Manager, AMREF – KCO; P O Box 30125, Nairobi or email to: Recruitment@amrefke.org. We
regret that only short-listed candidates will be contacted.
Closing Date: 12th August, 2005
AMREF is an equal opportunity employer and has a non-smoking environment policy
“Winner of the 2005 Gates Award for Global Health”