Daily Nation/ Friday, November 18, 2005

AMPATH
The Academic Model for the Prevention and Treatment of HIV/AIDS (AMPATH) is a project under the
partnership of Moi University School of Medicine, Moi Teaching and Referral Hospital together with
collaborating U.S.A Medical Schools led by Indiana University School of Medicine as one of Kenya’s
and Sub-Saharan Africa’s most comprehensive HIV Initiatives. The overreaching goal of AMPATH is
to establish a working model of both urban and rural comprehensive HIV preventive and treatment
services. AMPATH has structured its patient care programs to simultaneously provide HIV related
teaching and research. AMPATH has set up infrastructure and manpower capable of effectively
managing the complex issues surrounding antiretroviral therapy. Besides treatment and prevention
programs, AMPATH also offers additional patient support initiatives that include:
1. Treatment of opportunistic infections
2. Microeconomic support that prepares patients for income security
3. Nutritional support while training patients on food security
4. Pilot programs are underway for t he support of children orphaned from HIV positive
parents
5. Carrying out research activities as well as offering psychosocial support.
AMPATH hosts an accredited fully equipped Training institute recognized by the Ministry of Health
through the National AIDS and STI Control Program (NASCOP) that offers various short courses on
HIV Management
COMPREHENSIVE MANAGEMENT OF HIV COURSE
Applicants are invited for the comprehensive management of HIV and AIDS course which targets
medical doctors and clinical officers for 10th January 2006. This is a one month course of 160 hours
of which 60 hours are facilitated by lecturers from Moi University School of Medicine and the
AMPATH Training Institute and the remaining 100 hours will be for mentorship/attachment at the
AMPATH urban and rural HIV clinics.
This is a full time course leading to the award of a certificate from AMPATH Training Institute. The
programme will be conducted through modules which ensure that participants learn and are
assessed within their working environment.
SELECTION CRITERIA
Potential candidates should be in possession of:
i. Diploma in clinical medicine
ii. Degree in Medicine
iii. At least two years working experience in a busy health facility
COURSE FEE
The course will cost a total of thirty thousand shillings (Ksh. 30, 000). This amount excludes
accommodation, food and other incidentals.
APPLICATION PROCEDURE
Applications must be accompanied with
i. Copies of all academic and professional certificates
ii. A copy of the National Identity card
iii. A current Curriculum Vitae
iv. A non-refundable application fee of Ksh. 500.00 in the form of a banker’s cheque or money
order payable to Moi Teaching and Referral Hospital Projects account. Cash is strictly not
allowed.
Applications should be submitted before Tuesday 6th December 2005 to:
The Training Manager,
AMPATH Training Institute,
P.O. Box 4606, 30100,
Eldoret.
Tel; 0722278582
Email; htadayo@mtrh.org