Sunday Nation/ May 22, 2005
BY LINA NJOROGE
Shedding light on the dilemma of weight loss
When a person is not eating adequate
food portions or sometimes when
the food that they have eaten is not
well absorbed, weight loss can
occur. The body hence draws from its reserve
stores of energy, which mainly come from body
fat and the muscle protein. Consequently, this
leads to loss of body weight and muscle. Weight
loss in adults is normally gradual and sometimes
may not be that obvious. But when a person
loses about 10 per cent of their body weight or
about 6 to 7 kg in a month, then there is cause
for concern.
Increased requirements
A person infected with HIV/Aids develops special
eating requirements and therefore needs to
ensure they are put on a balanced diet. This will
help them meet their increased nutrient requirements
and therefore maintain their nutritional
status while avoiding the risks of weight loss.
A person living with the virus has increased
energy and nutrient requirements as the body’s
defence system tries to work hard to fight the
infection. Generally any infection will cause one
to have fever which increases their body’s
demand for food and nutrients. The three
main factors that cause weight loss and malnutrition
in people with HIV/Aids are; reduced dietary
or nutrient intake, reduced food and nutrient
absorption, and increased nutrient
requirements.
If these three major components are not
addressed, weight loss and malnutrition is inevitable.
When a person is malnourished, their
immune system becomes weak and therefore
they are not able to fight off infections. In the
case of HIV infection, malnutrition causes the
disease to progress faster to the Aids stage and
as the disease progresses, opportunistic infections
are increased. This in turn lowers the CD4
cell count and the cycle continues. CD4 cells are
the cells that constitute the main body’s
defence system. The HIV virus attacks these
cells.
Majority of people living with HIV/Aids are
not able to address these three components
either due to ignorance or lack of financial
capacity to cope. Unfortunately medical nutritional
therapy has not been given the emphasis
that it deserves, considering that it is one of
the most important facets of the overall medical
management of HIV/Aids. Other reasons
that may cause weight loss and malnutrition in
people with HIV/Aids include;
 The illness and drugs taken may reduce appetite
or cause nausea.
 Opportunistic infections coupled with other
related symptoms such as sore mouth, oral thrush,
diarrhoea, painful chewing or swallowing due to the
sores in the mouth or throat, definitely lower the
volume of food intake.
 Loss of appetite due to depression, anxiety, isolation,
tiredness, medication or even the disease
itself.
 HIV/Aids also reduces the absorption of food or
cause the body not to absorb the food well (malabsorption).
The virus may damage the gut wall which
then affects the passage of food. When this happens,
then diarrhoea occurs as a result of food passing
through the gut very quickly.
 Eat more food by increasing your portions
and also eating more frequently.
 Increase foods from all the food groups to
keep to the recommended percentages.
Include staple foods such as maize, ugali, rice,
githeri, arrow roots, potatoes, millet, sweet
potatoes or bananas.
 Include beans, lentils, peas, groundnuts,
peanuts or peanut butter and meats such as
beef, chicken, goat meat and fish. Minced
meat, fish and chicken of course are easier to
digest.
 Eat snacks regularly between meals.
Choose healthy snacks such as sandwiches
with rich fillings like peanut butter, fruit,
yoghurt.
 Increase your fat content gradually in your
food by adding more fat or oil. Make sure you
don’t eat excess fat as this may cause diarrhoea.
How to gain weight
 Introduce more dairy products to your daily
meals such as sour milk, butter, yoghurt and
cheese. Fermented drinks like milk or porridge
are more tolerated by persons with diarrhoea.
 Enrich your soups or porridge with powdered
milk, full cream milk, buttermilk, yoghurt.
You can add the same also to mashed foods,
cereals and sauces.
 Add sugar, honey, jam or syrup to your food
or beverages.
 Do not skip meals. Remember you can only
eat what the body is able to tolerate depending
on the symptoms being experienced.
Just like early treatment of infections is important,
the same is even important for nutritional
intervention. Seek nutritional help in the early
stages of the disease so as to maintain adequate
weight and live a positive life.