WEDNESDAY NOVEMBER 16, 2005

I am 18 years old and four months pregnant. I
would like to go for an HIV test but I am
scared. My husband-to-be tested positive and
I fear that my unborn child could have the virus as
well. What can I do to prevent it from getting infected
with the virus? Worried
Jayne Mwoki, Meru
About 39 million people live with HIV/Aids
worldwide with 75 per cent in sub-Saharan
Africa. Most of those infected and affected
range from between 15-49 years. Women in the reproductive
age make-up 50 per cent of these.
The prevalence of HIV in Kenya is seven per cent with
more than 50 per cent being women.
As devastating as HIV/Aids may be, the good news is
that majority of babies born to infected mothers are
born negative. But without proper antenatal delivery
and postnatal care, the risk of infection increases. This
accounts for over 95 per cent of HIV infection from
mother to child.
HIV infection from mother to child can occur during
pregnancy, delivery and during breastfeeding.
Long periods of labour, prolonged breakage of fore
waters, manipulations of the baby during delivery, deliveries
by traditional or unskilled birth attendants among
others also increase the risk.
Infant feeding practices also increase the risk of infection.
They include prolonged breastfeeding, cracked
nipples and breast infection; the presence of mouth
sores in the baby and mixed-feeding.
With proper interventions, the chances of your baby
being infected can be reduced. It is possible for one to
be infected yet look and feel good until the virus takes a
toll on their health. It is also possible for a partner to test
positive yet the other is negative. These are known as
discordant couples.
To reduce the chance of mother-to-child transmission of
HIV, private and government health facilities have set
up clinics that offer programmes related to this. They
are known as PMTCT clinics.
Here, the expectant mother is taken through sessions of
counseling before the HIV test where she is educated
on various issues. After the test she is counseled again
and supported on whatever mode of infant feeding she
opts for. She is also started on medication to prevent
transmission during pregnancy and in labour. She is
also given supplements to boost her immunity.
The baby is given medication to stop any chance of
HIV transmission. Safe delivery options are also
addressed.
Take your partner for both of you to be counseled. This
is important to help identify discordant couples and for
partners to give each other support.
Proper follow-up and care is also important.
After delivery, an HIV positive mother and child need to
be followed up to ensure accesses to optimal health
care and family planning services.
Jayne, get courage and go for the test. You have a
chance to stop your baby from contracting the HIV
infection.
My daughter is three years old. For one year I
have been taking her to various health facilities
for a skin condition that does not improve with
medication. I was eventually referred to a skin specialist
who said my daughter was suffering from a condition
known as pellagra, which is due to lack of vitamins.
What is this condition and can one avoid it?
Moses, Ahero
Pellagra or cough skin is due to lack of a vitamin
known as niacin found in common foods
and forms part of the vitamin B complex group.
This vitamin is found in liver, lean pork, fish, poultry, red
meat, enriched cereals, whole grain, vegetable and
peanuts.
Pellagra is common where foods like corn or maize are
staple foods. They are poor sources of niacin.
A deficiency of this vitamin leads to swelling and
destruction of the skin support integrity, which becomes
thick hard. These affect the linings of the body even in
the mouth, tongue and digestive system. With disease
progression these linings become thin and lose their
functions. Affection of the nerves and the brain are a
late feature. Early symptoms are vague and include
poor appetite, weakness, burning sensation of the skin,
numbness and dizziness. Prolonged deficiency leads to
itchy skin rash, diarrhoea and mental regression. The
skin rash may be triggered by chemicals or intense
sunlight. They first appear on exposed surfaces that
resemble a burn.
Those on the hands and feet may have a particular pattern
like a glove or soak. The lesions on the neck look
like a necklace known as casal necklace.
Some skin rashes may have fluid filled swellings.
Healed rash is often darker than the rest. The patient
may develop sores around the mouth, on the tongue, or
develop vomiting or diarrhoea.
The child may be depressed, disoriented or delirious
and lack sleep. Other nutritional deficiencies may be
present and other family members may be affected as
well. Diagnosis is by the appearance of the child on
examination. Trial of niacin treatment confirms the disease.
Treatment involves niacin administration and the
response is quick.
Other vitamin supplements are recommended. Skin
soothing applications are helpful, as are proper diets.
Eating a well-balanced diet that includes meat, vegetables,
eggs and milk best ensures the prevention of pellagra.
Your daughter will be fine. Always ensure a well-balanced
diet for you family to avoid food or vitamin related
diseases.
fridahafandi@yahoo.com