{"text": "MINISTRY- OF HEALTH\nNATIONAL AIDS/STDS CONTROL PROGRAMME (NASCOP)\nSENTINEL SURVEILLANCE RESULTS\nSentinel surveillance is the systematic collection of data on trends in HIV infections in selected populations. Sentinel surveillance systems for HIV are designed to provide information to policy makers and programme planners for action. The data is useful for understanding the magnitude of the HIV/AIDS problem in certain areas and monitoring the impact of interventions.\nThe HIV sentinel surveillance system in Kenya is coordinated by the National AIDS and STDs Control Programme. It became operational in 1990 and has been conducted annually. Sentinel surveillance complements the passive AIDS surveillance system (routine reporting) which has its own limitations.\nThese limitations include the fact that AIDS cases do not reflect current transmission rates of HIV infection since the interval between HIV infection and the onset of AIDS is between 3 and 10 years.\nFurthermore, reported AIDS cases represent only a small proportion of AIDS cases which have occurred. HIV sentinel surveillance involves the selection of specific sites at which a pre-determined number of persons from specific population group(s) are routinely tested in a regular and consistent procedure according to a pre-determined protocol Data is collected for both antenatal clinic (ANC) clients and for STDs patients. The STDs data is primarily designed to represent high risk populations while the ANC data represent the general health population. In estimating the general HIV prevalence rate the ANC data is applied.\nBlood used for HIV testing is obtained through an unlinked anonymous procedure - alter testing for syphilis, which is the purpose for which the blood was originally drawn, all the personal identifiers are removed. The remaining serum sample is then later tested for HIV. The key advantage in the unlinked procedure is the reduction of self selection bias with a resultant increase in accuracy. The objectives of the Kenya HIV sentinel surveillance system are: \nTo estimate the prevalence and distribution of HIV infection in specific populations in specific geographic areas.\nTo monitor trends in HIV infection.\nTo provide information for evaluating intervention programmes against HIV/AIDS.\n\nThe sentinel surveillance system therefore provides the basis for estimating the extent of HIV infection. The sentinel surveillance system operates in 13 urban sites and 11 peri-urban/rural sites around the country. These sites are all ante-natal clinics, where women go for care during pregnancy. Each year, 200-300 pregnant women are tested for HIV in each site. The results are reported to the National AIDS and STDs Control Programme.\nThe results for 1998 show that there are several places in Kenya - Busia, Kisumu, Nakuru, Thika, Meru, Chulaimbo, Karurumo - where the proportion of pregnant women who are infected with HIVIS greater than 20 percent. In several other sites - Kakamega, Kisii, Kitale, Mombasa, Maragua, Nairobi, Nyen -10-20 percent of pregnant women are infected. In other sites - Garissa, Mosoriot, Kaplong, Njabiniand Motorno - infection rates are 3-9 percent. Some sites may have lower infection rates because behavior patterns are different or because the epidemic started later in these areas. However, it is clear that the levels of HIV infection are alarmingly high in many parts of the country.\nUsing the sentinel surveillance data and adjusting it to be representative of the total population, NASCOP has estimated that in 1998 there were 1.9 million people in Kenya infected with HIV including 100,000 children.\n\nTrends in HIV Prevalence in ANC Patients at Selected Clinics\nTrends in HIV infection are shown for two sentinel surveillance sites, Mombasa and Meru \u2022 for the last eight years. These graphs show the percentage of pregnant women visiting the clinic who are infected with HIV. Mombasa is representative of an area that has had stable infection levels for some time. A stable infection level means that the number of new infections each year equals the number of people dying each from AIDS (provided, no major population movements occur). Meru is an example of an area that has experienced rapid increases in the number of people infected. The rapid spread of HIV infection means that no district in Kenya can be complacent about AIDS, even if HIV levels are currently low. HIV can spread very rapidly and become a major problem in a time period as short as one or two years. \n\nResults for each of the sentinel surveillance sites are shown in the table below. It should be noted that these are not exact estimates since the number of women tested varies by year and by site.\nWhen the number tested is small, the uncertainty associated with the estimate is high. However, taken as a whole, these results describe the trends of HIV infection in some parts of urban and rural Kenya. "}