{"text": "MINISTRY OF HEALTH\nNATIONAL AIDS/STDS CONTROL PROGRAMME (NASCOP)\nSERIALlSATION OF\"AIDS IN KENYA\", '1999 BOOK\nThe HIV/AIDS Pyramid\n87,070 Reported AIDS Cases (JUNE 1999)\n760,000 Actual AIDS Cases\n1,900,000 HIV Infections (1998 estimate)\n\nOver 87,000 cases of AIDS have been reported to the Ministry of Health since the first case was described in Kenya, in 1984 through June 1999. All districts are affected. Reported AIDS cases represent only the, visible part of the epidemic. This is what most people see. However, there is much more to the epidemic than the number of reported cases.\nWe know that not all AIDS cases are reported, This can happen for several reasons: \n\u2022 some people never seek hospital care for AIDS\n\u2022 some doctors may not want to record a diagnosis of AIDS because of the stigma attached to AIDS\n\u2022 some people with HIV infection may die of other diseases before they are ever diagnosed as having AIDS, and\n\u2022 some rural heath care facilities may not have the capability to test for HIV infection\n\nThe true number of AIDS cases in Kenya is not known. However, it is estimated that over 700,000 adults and children had developed AIDS by the end of 1998.\nAIDS cases are only the tip of the pyramid. Many more people are infected with HIV, the virus that causes AIDS. \nIn 1998 it is estimated that there were about 1.9 million people infected with HIV. This includes about 100,000 children. Most of these people do not know they are infected. They may have no symptoms at all. However, almost all will, develop AIDS and die within the next 10 years or so. There is no cure for AIDS and no effective vaccine.\n\nAIDS stands for Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome. It is a disease that\u2019s caused by the HIV virus. It acts by weakening the immune system, making the body susceptible to other diseases.\n\nSENTINEL SURVEILLANCE RESULTS\nSentinel surveillance is the systematic collection of data on trends in HIV infections in selected populations, Sentinel surveillance systems for HIV are designed to provide information to policy makers and programme planners for action. The data is useful for understanding the magnitude of the HIV/AIDS problem in certain areas and monitoring the impact of interventions.\nThe HIV sentinel surveillance system in Kenya is coordinated br the National AIDS and STDs Control Programme. It became operational in 1990 and has been conducted annually. Sentinel surveillance complements the passive AIDS surveillance system (routine reporting) which has its own limitations.\nThese limitations include the fact that AIDS cases do not reflect current transmission rates of HIV infection since the interval between HIV infection and the onset of AIDS is between 3 and 10 years.\nFurthermore, reported AIDS cases represent only a small proportion of AIDS cases which have occurred.\nHIV sentinel surveillance involves the selection of specific sites at which a pre-determined number of persons from specific population group(s) are routinely tested in a regular and consistent procedure according to a pre-determined protocol Data is collected for both antenatal clinic (ANC) clients and for STDs patients. The STDs data is primarily designed to represent high risk populations while the ANC data represent the general health population. \nIn estimating the general HIV prevalence rate the ANC data is applied.\nBlood used for HIV testing is obtained through an unlinked anonymous procedure - after testing for syphilis, which is the purpose for which the blood was originally drawn, all the personal identifiers are removed. The remaining, serum sample is then later tested for HIV. The key advantagesin the unlinked procedure is the reduction of self selection bias with a resultant increase in accuracy. \nThe objectives of the Kenya sentinel surveillance system are:\n\nTo estimate the prevalence and distribution of HIV infection in specific populations in specific geographic areas.\nTo monitor trends in HIV in infection.\nTo provide information for evaluating intervention programs against HIV/AIDS.\n\nThe sentinel surveillance system therefore provides the basis for estimating the extent of HIV infection. The sentinel surveillance system operates in 13 urban sites and 11 peri-urban/rural sites around the country.\nThese sites are all ante-natal clinics, where women go for care during pregnancy. Each year, 200-300 pregnant women are tested for HIV in each site. The results are reported to the National AIDS and STDs Control Programme,\nThe results for 1998 show that there are several\nplaces in Kenya. Busia, Kisumu, Nakuru, Thika, Meru, Chulaimbo, Karurumo - where the proportion of pregnant women who are infected with HIV IS greater than 20 percent. In several other sites - Kakamega, Kisii, Kilale Mombasa, Maragua, Nairobi. Nyeri - 10-20 percent of pregnant women are infected. In other sites - Garissa, Mosoriot. Kaplong, Njabini and\nMatorna - infection levels are 3-9 percent. Some Sites may have lower infection rates because behavior patterns are different or because the epidemic started later in these areas. However, it is clear that the levels of HIV infection are alarmingly high in many parts of\nthe country.\nUsing the sentinel surveillance data and adjusting it to be representative of the total population, NASCOP has estimated that in 1998 there were 1.9 millon people in Kenya infected with HIV including 100,000 children.\n\nTrends in HIV Prevalence in ANC Patients at Selected Clinics\nTrends in HIV infection are shown for two sentinel surveillance sites, Mombasa and Meru  for the last eight years. These graphs show the percentage of pregnant woman visiting the clinic who are infected with HIV ( Mombasa is\nrepresentative of an area that has had stable infection levels for some time. A stable infection level means that the number of new infections each year equals the number of people dying each from AIDS (provided no major population movements occur) \nMeru is an example of an area that has experienced rapid increases in the number of people infected.\nThe rapid spread of HIV infection means that no district in Kenya can be complacent about HIV, even if HIV levels are currently low. HIV can spread very rapidly and become a major problem in a time period as short as one or two years.\n\nResults for each of the sentinel surveillance sites are shown in the table below. It should be noted that these are not exact estimates since the number of women tested varies by year and by site.\nWhen the number tested is small, the uncertainty associated with the estimate is high. However, taken as a whole, these results describe the trends of HIV infection in some parts of urban and rural Kenya."}