WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 11, 1992

Where did the virus come from?

By OPIYO OFULLA 
Aids is now an epidemic 
affecting thousands of people worldwide. The disease is still incurable 
and the prospects for 
its control in the near future are 
still very slim. 
Although Aids is a very recent 
disease, nobody really knows 
where it came from. Not that 
such a knowledge would help alleviate the situation but, as with 
any other calamity which affects 
mankind, people always have this 
urge to unravel its origins. 
There have been speculations 
and controversies concerning the 
orgins of Aids and the virus 
which causes it. 
Earlier, rumours had it that 
the Aids virus originated from 
Africa, out of some weird interaction between the monkeys and 
human beings, The story maintained that since the human Aids 
virus had some resemblance to 
the monkey virus, some rural Africans must have acquired the virus from the monkeys through 
some blood mixing. 
It was hypotbesised that since 
some rural Africans ate monkeys, 
the monkey virus must have had 
an opportunity to infect man and 
evolve into a form capable of 
causing Aids in man. 
This hypothesis caused a lot of 
hostility and mistrust between its 
propagators and the majority of 
Africans, as it opened old racial 
wounds which were thought to 
have been healed. As it soon be 
came clear that this African mon 
keys affair would not help in 
curbing Aids, en alternative theory about the origin of Aids came 
up. 
This second theory claimed
that Aids virus was tailored in 
the USA army germ warfare laboratories. The theory came as a 
relief to many people who found 
the earlier ‘African monkey affairs’ theory a bit uncomfortable. 
The supporters of this theory 
based their arguments on the fact 
that the advanced scientific capabilities of the USA Laboratories 
were almost unlimited. 
“If they can send people to the 
moon and are now trying to patent genetically altered organisms, 
then why can’t they tailor a simple Aids virus in the laboratory?” 
the propagators asked. 
But the question which remained in many people’s minds 
was the motive. Why make the 
virus in the first place? Was it a 
conspiracy, a grand plan to eliminate some targeted enemies9 
If there was a sinister motive 
then why was the disease not tailored to spare its originators? 
Another weakness with the germ warfare theory was its 
testability. So it remained just 
another wild speculation. 
Now the most recent theory is 
claiming that. Aids could have 
been spread by polio vaccines in 
Africa. In this years March and 
May issues of Science, the weekly magazine of the American Association for the advancement of Science, there were strong debates about a controversial article originally written by Tom Curtis 
in the Rolling Stone magazine. 
The article hypothesizes that 
the Aids virus first entered 
humans in Africa via an oral polio vaccine 
widely administered in the 
1950’s. 
According to the article, 
as-yet-undiscovered simian 
monkey) form of HIV-I may
contaminated a polio vaccine 
manufactured by Hilary 
Kaprowski, a former director of 
Wister Institute in Philadelphia, 
USA. That virus, the article continues “might have come from 
the monkey kidney cells which 
Kaprowski grew.” 
The vaccine, we are further 
told, “was tested in what is now 
Rwanda, Zaire, and Burundi during the late 1950s where it was 
spray-injected into the mouths of 
several hundred thousand 
people”. 
To corroborate these claims, 
positivity to HIV has been 
be  “ in the former Congo 
Rwanda, and Burundi where the injection was supposed
to have been administered. 
It is also in this region of central equatorial Africa “where 
some of the earliest Aids cases 
were retrospectively identified by 
Western blot and Enzyme Linked 
Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA), 
says tom Curtis in a reply to his 
critics contained in the May 1992 
issue of Science. 
Tom Curtis’ convincing story 
may partly explain the earlier 
speculations about the Aids’ origin from the African monkeys, 
this time bringing in the US lab 
oratories link. 
As the saying goes, where there 
is smoke, there is fire. This is 
probably where the truth about 
the origin of Aids will eventually
come from. 
The Curtis story has caused so 
much debate that possible ways 
of testing his hypothesis have 
been considered. 
According to Cecil H. Fox, al8o 
in an article published in the May 
1992 issue of Science, serum 
samples and vaccines from the 
period between 1952 and 1982 
can be tested for the presence of 
immunodeficiency viruses. 
The Wister Institute has an 
nounced that it is forming a com 
mittee “to evaluate the Rolling 
Stone speculations.” 
According to Thomas Folks, 
chief of CDC’s retrovirus branch, 
Curtis’ story is just a typical “fragrant case of selective editing and
journalistic malpractice.’ 
Folks charges that Curtis selectively ignored the epidemiologic 
and laboratory data he was offered against the poiìo vaccine hypothesis.” . 
to Gerald Quinnan Jr., deputy director of the food and drug administration branch that over sees vaccines, “It is not possible 
for SIV (simian (monkey) immunodeficiency virus) to be present 
in polio vaccines in any substantial amount”. Quinnan claims 
that he deliberately tried to infect 
monkey kidney cells with SIV 
and failed. 
And according to Kaprowaki, 
the manufacturer of the original 
Congo vaccine, Curtis only chose 
to misconstrue the information 
and “propagate a hypothesis without basis’. 
After the press had picked up 
the hot Curtis story in the US, 
the CDC (centers for Disease 
Control, USA) issued a terse 
statement saying that “the 
weight o scientific evidence does 
not support this idea and there in 
no more reason to believe this 
hypothesis than many others 
which have been considered and 
rejected on scientific grounds” 
Interestingly, some Aids researchers seem to regard Curtis 
hypothesis favourably, though 
with some reservations, SIV researcher Ronard Destosiera of 
the New England regional research center says that “he’s never heard a good reason why the 
hypothesis is not plausible. 
Amidst all these debates, Tom 
Curtis, the originator of the hypothesis has chosen to take a 
neutral stand. He argues that he was simply trying to prod researchers into examining a testable hypothesis. 
As we Kenyans would rightly 
put it, we only hope that no stone 
will remain unturned in the search for truth about the origins 
of the yet unstoppable Aids. Lets 
just wait and see.



